Okay, good. So this is lecture two. What we did from last year is we've actually compressed
yesterday's lecture, which was the introduction to the science, but also the observations
into one lecture. So there's a bit more time for the other lectures, which talk a bit more
about the fundamental of the physics. And so you have time to engage a bit more with
the physics. And today's lecture, we're going to have a lecture, which we should be done by
10 o'clock. No, sorry, by 930, if not before. And then we have a practical to get started.
The start of the practical, we will talk about El Nino. Okay. Because that's what's going to
be the practical that goes forward. And in terms of accessing course material, have you
all been able to access the Google Drive? Okay. So that's important, because that's where we're
going to put the lectures after they've happened. And also for the tutorials, we have a folder with
them ready, and then we'll place them into that. So Eman, at some point, if you can put that,
lecture slides and the Python notebook into that. And so we'll start with the Python notebook today.
Still very simple, nothing too complicated, and we will get more interesting and more mathematical
as things progress. Now, the goal of the lectures this week and the practical is to give you a good
flavor for how different climate change is from weather prediction. Okay. And we are lining up some
guest lectures about something that DeepMind has developed called Gencast, which is about a very
good weather prediction system, which is purely machine learning driven. And you need to understand
how that's different from the climate problem. We are very close to having confirmed a lecture with
the developers of a model called Neural GCM, which is partly physics based and partly machine
learning based. And it can do a bit more climate type things. And essentially, it's this.
At the longest time scale, that's the whole planet is getting warm on average.
You can think of it very simply as being it's about the balance of energy. So imagine that I'm
holding in my hand here a big metal ball, it's floating. Okay. And we get a big heater,
not a fan heater, but like a radiation heater. So one of those infrared ones with the red bars.
And we are holding it here, and this is heating up the ball. Okay. And at some point, that ball
will reach a temperature based on how much heat is coming in. And it will stay at that temperature,
and it will start to release heat itself away. And if that ball is spinning, like the earth is,
I will be able to stand with a hand over here. And even though I can't feel this heater,
I can feel the heat coming off the metal ball. Okay. And climate change and the global temperature
is essentially about that. It's about the amount of energy that comes in and the energy that goes
out and how the atmosphere keeps that in balance. Okay. The practical is about
how the atmosphere responds to the ocean. So if you make an ocean warmer, that's going to
change the atmosphere above it. And then the atmosphere can change in ways that produce
draughts or floods in different places. Okay. And this is, that process is seasonal forecasting.
That's how we can actually, in advance of the 23, 24 El Nino, I spoke about
over Southern Africa, there were predictions about that. The same thing in Kenya,
there were predictions about floods in that same year. And then finally we come to weather
forecasting. And weather forecasting is about predicting how a fluid evolves through time.
So if you look up at the mountain and you see the clouds making waves over the mountain,
that's fluid flow. And if you think about those animations we had of the satellites yesterday,
with the clouds pulsing across the continent, that is fluid flow and that's weather prediction.
Okay. Today's lecture is about this thing about Earth is a big ball in the solar system
and there is sunlight coming in to warm it up. And it turns out that you can change how warm
Earth gets based on changing the composition of the atmosphere. Okay. So I'm going to repeat all
of that now. If that all made sense, then you can go to sleep. If you would like to know more,
then there are some slides to come. And to say, so this is what I've said,
it's about Earth's radiation budget. It's the energy coming in and out. Navier-Stokes equation,
this is about the fluid flow. And how you create models based on these equations is what we come
to on Friday. The aspect of a boundary value problem, you may understand it from the
mathematics you've done. We'll come back to it later on. But it's to understand that it's not
about your starting conditions of your system. It's about the background conditions of the system.
We'll explain that now. But this is going to become important. So by the end of the week,
you need to understand the difference between climate being a boundary value problem and
weather prediction being an initial value problem. Okay.
So there's a really nice course you can do called How to Build a Habitable Planet.
And it turns out that Earth is at just the right distance from the sun that we can have water
in both its gas phase, its ice phase, and its liquid phase. So if we went out
much further away from the sun, the oceans would become covered in ice. If we were much closer to
the sun, we wouldn't be able to have oceans. All of that water vapor would be evaporated
into the atmosphere. Okay. And this means it's a Goldilocks planet, not too hot, not too cold.
Yeah, this is what we're saying, all three phases. And so it's about how much energy
the sun gives us and how far we are away from the sun in order to support that.
Another aspect that's important to understand is that
the sun is really hot, 6,000 Kelvin. So if you want that in degrees Celsius, you minus 273.
So do that in your head. That is 5,000. I'm not doing that very quickly in my head today. 5,717.
Is that? Anyway, did you have a different number? Yeah. Yeah. So 5,717 degrees Celsius.
Oh, 27. Yes. 5,727 degrees Celsius. Okay. So it's very hot. And the thing about
the electromagnetic spectrum, which we saw yesterday, which goes all the way from X-rays
through to radio waves, is that the wavelength at which an object emits most of its energy
depends on its temperature. So the sun is really hot.
And Earth is actually quite cold, 288 Kelvin. So that means that on average across the Earth,
the average Earth's surface temperature is only
14, 15 degrees Celsius. Okay. And that means that Earth is still a warm body. It still emits
energy, but at a much different wavelength. And that's what this curve shows. So the sun,
because it is so hot, the wavelengths that it emits energy at in the electromagnetic spectrum
are very short. They are visible lights. Okay. Any idea, then, where in astrophysics,
X-rays, we sometimes see X-rays and we sometimes see gamma rays, which are the
most high-energy waves. Where would they come from? Anybody? Anyone do some astrophysics at
some point? Have you heard of supernova? Yeah. So supernova, when a sun explodes,
a star explodes, it goes bang, it gets very, very hot. And so there's this pulse
of gamma radiation or even, or X-ray radiation that gets emitted. Okay. Because it is so hot,
that would be somewhere over here in terms of the actual wavelength. It'd be very tiny. It would
actually be up here. So the sun, most of it comes in visible wavelengths, which essentially are
short waves. So if you look at the sun, it's very, very short. It's very, very short. It's very,
essentially are short waves. So if you looked at the wavelength of the electromagnetic wave,
it's quite short. Earth's radiation, because it's a much cooler body, it emits it at around here,
10 to 12. The units are micrometers in this particular one. Okay. And that means that when
you build satellites, those geostationary satellites, their sensors are specifically
designed to detect radiation in wavelengths around here. So the images we saw of the satellites
yesterday, there are some which are looking at the reflected radiation, but the ones that are
looking at the infrared radiation that we can see all through the day and the night, they have sensors
which are often about here, 11 microns. Okay. So the key thing to take away is that the
temperature of a body changes the wavelength of the radiation that gets emitted by that body.
So the sun is emitting very short wavelengths and earth is emitting much longer wavelengths.
Okay. So that's the very first important thing.
That's the energy. So the energy emitted by the sun at one micron is over a thousand watts per
meter squared. Okay. The total energy emitted by the sun is the integration under the curve.
So the area under curve tells you what's the total amount of energy the sun emits. Okay.
Yeah. So what is newtons per second? So it's energy per second. Yeah. No, energy is newtons
per second. Yeah. And then per meter squared is so you just say it's over, you know, a unit meter
squared. Okay. So you can see that then earth, you know, the thing is you see these axes are not
linear. Okay. I mean, okay, this is, yeah, that axis is linear, but this one is not. So this is
going up in a logarithmic scale. So earth is only emitting 10 watts per meter squared at these
wavelengths. Okay. So you can add it all up to see how much energy earth emits relative to the sun.
So we'll come back to that wavelength aspect.
Okay. So if the sun is emitting energy in a sphere away from the sun, by the time it gets to earth,
the energy that was emitted at the surface of the sun is now going to be spread out a lot more.
So the energy in watts per meter squared that the sun emits is going to be far lower
as you move further away. Okay. That's why we say it's the Goldilocks zone.
Okay. So there's a certain amount that arrives at earth and this is called the solar constant.
Okay. And it's about 1370 watts per meter squared, but it arrives at earth and earth
is not flat. Earth is a sphere. And so the simplest model for climate is what happens
if this solar flux, which is this amount of energy, 1370 watts per meter squared,
is distributed across the whole of the planet. Okay. So does that formula look familiar to anyone?
Exactly. Surface of a sphere. So what we have is that the, and then the final thing
is that the energy that earth emits needs to be set the same as the energy that
comes into the earth. Why does it have to be the same?
Yeah. What would happen if earth did not emit the same amounts of radiation as it received?
It'll get hotter and hotter and hotter. Okay. And so we have the amount of energy coming from the
sun, which is the solar constant. Okay. And that needs to be balanced by, this is now the
temperature of earth at which it's emitting. Okay. And by the surface area, and then there's
all the physics that determines this Planck's constant. Okay. So Planck's constant is the
relationship between the emission, the total emission of a body and its temperature. Okay.
And we're not going to derive it now, but the point is that that energy is being emitted by
the full surface of earth. Okay. And so the energy comes in on one side of earth,
earth is spinning around, that energy gets distributed, and we end up with this balance.
So it's not too different from thinking about balancing this on your finger. The amount of
energy coming in has to be the amount of energy going out. So energy in, energy out. Otherwise,
we're just going to get hotter and hotter. Has anybody heard of this term albedo?
No. So albedo is the amount of energy that is emitted by the sun. Okay. And so
albedo is the fact that actually some of this energy that arrives at earth's surface is not
going to stay on earth's surface. It's going to bounce off. Now, part of that is you can think
just about the reflection. If you shine something, you know, at an angle, a lot of it's going to
bounce off. But part of it is that it's cold at the poles. So there's lots of ice. And so a whole
lot of the energy that arrives is actually reflected by the ice caps away to space. And also there's
really high ice clouds that we saw, those very white clouds yesterday. Those are also reflecting
the energy away from earth's surface. And so albedo, which we typically have at about 30%,
is the energy that's just lost to reflection. So it never actually reaches
earth's surface to warm it up. So this means that this solar constant that comes in is normally
scaled by 0.7. So there's 30% that's lost. Right. And so that's the simplest model of climate. You
can write it down. You're saying there's energy coming from the atmosphere. There is
from the sun. It's balanced by the energy that leaves earth. And this is set by the temperature
of earth. Okay. So you can do this calculation. I'll leave you to do it in your own time.
Unless somebody wants to do it very quickly. Anyone got a calculator and wants to
quickly go for it? The radius of earth is what we know. We don't.
Because now let's see, does this board, is this board going to let me do this?
No. Do I paste this one?
Ah, like that. Okay. Ah, okay. Cool. Thank you. Cool. There we go.
Ah, okay. So it might be a smart board, but I'm not.
Okay. Let's try. Okay. So if we look at this equation. Sorry? Oh, yeah. Okay.
Okay. So these are going to cancel out as are these.
So we're left with the solar constant, which we have over here. We have albedo, which is
about 0.3. Planck's constant is this number over here.
So if you solve for temperature, what are we getting? That would be T is equal to
the fourth root of s naught times 0.7 over 4 sigma. Anyone done the calculation yet on their calculator?
What number do we have?
It's going to give us a number in Telvin.
Okay. Well, whoever gets the number first, just shout out. I'm not doing that in my head.
Yeah, I'll also note that's 10 to the minus eight.
Okay.
Okay. We have an answer that it's going to be 255 Kelvin. Okay. So let's turn that into
degrees Celsius, because maybe we don't think in that. We end up with
minus 18 degrees Celsius. Okay. What number did I tell you earlier?
What's missing from this bottle of climate? Because this is not the surface temperature of Earth.
This is the surface temperature of the whole system. So when Earth is radiating energy out
from the top of its atmosphere, that would be about correct. But Earth is not just a sphere.
It's a sphere covered in what? Gas. Yes, exactly. So the thing that's been missing. Okay, now we
need to close this. The thing that we were missing was an atmosphere. Okay. And so when you think
about the balance of climate from that simple model, it is about that. That is about the balance
of energy coming into the top and going out of the top. Okay. But the atmosphere is what sets
what Earth's surface temperature is, which is 15. So minus 18 is too cold. We need an atmosphere.
And so what happens with this mathematics is that we extend that previous model of the climate,
but we add an atmosphere that has a temperature. Okay. So if we think about this, what we've done
is we said this was just the temperature of Earth. Okay. And now what we did is we're adding a layer
around it to account for the gas. The atmosphere has its own temperature. So it can emit energy
based on its temperature up and down. And then the ground has its own temperature. So now we have
ground temperature. We have atmospheric temperature. Okay. If you would like to follow the
mathematics, you can look at the slides yourself, make sense of this and see if you come out with
the same value. There, you end up with the temperature of the ground being 13 degrees.
So I said 15 degrees. So we're in a good place. Okay. And then the temperature of the atmosphere
is minus 28 degrees Celsius. So that's the average temperature of a single layer atmosphere. Okay.
And is it, does that make sense? Do we need one more explanation of that? Or are you happy to look
at the video? So what we know is that if Earth is a stable climate, which isn't getting much hotter.
I mean, you've seen that it's changed yesterday, but that change is like 0.1 degree.
No, it's no, it's one degree or so. It's about one degree. It's a change in the ground temperature.
But the whole system is not getting hotter. So it's in balance. It turns out that if you ignore
the atmosphere, you end up with a ground temperature that was minus 18 degrees, too cold.
You have to include the atmosphere. And when you have an atmosphere, you now have a system
where you have both the ground temperature and the atmospheric temperature, which together
requires a change in the temperature of the atmosphere. So you end up with a change in the
temperature, where you have both the ground temperature and the atmospheric temperature,
which together accounts for how much total energy would leave the atmosphere or leave the Earth
system. So we have solar energy coming in. This is then, so that solar energy coming in is balanced
by energy, which is F. So this is the flux of energy leaving the atmosphere,
F A, plus the amount that is coming through the atmosphere from the surface.
OK, so the total energy that can leave the atmosphere is made up of two parts. It's the
energy that is leaving from the atmosphere directly. So because the atmosphere has temperature
and the energy which leaves from the ground through the atmosphere. OK, and this here,
TLW, is about how much energy can escape from the ground. OK, so some of the atmosphere,
we will see, actually this energy from the ground warms up the atmosphere.
OK. Sorry, the s-bars were sort of constant, yes. So yeah, yeah, exactly. So that's not changing.
Yeah, so albedo was there, yeah. I should redo that slide to include these different terms.
And then, yeah, so here you have, that's the balance. And then for the FG term,
because we need this one over here. This is made up of two parts. So the balance of energy for the
whole system at the top of the atmosphere is that line. Energy leaves both from the atmosphere
radiating energy away and from the energy that has managed to escape through the atmosphere from
the ground. The balance of energy at the ground now is the atmospheric energy that's coming back.
So this FA and the amount of solar constant radiation that is transmitted through the
atmosphere. So this is like an amount that tells you how much energy can come through the atmosphere
to the surface. And that tells you the balance of energy at the surface.
OK. I'm seeing some nodding heads and some blank faces. I'm going to go one more step and then we'll
have a reconsideration. So when you, you can just do the algebra to eliminate the FA. And it ends
up that this flux of energy at the ground is related to the transmission of energy. So how
much energy can come from the sun? SW is short wave. OK, so these are short waves. Remember the
energy of the sun is in very small waves. The energy of the atmosphere and cooler things are
longer waves. OK. Here are those two values, an estimate of those two values. What does this
tell you about the short wave radiation? If the amount of the sun lights that can reach the surface
is 0.9 versus
the amount of surface radiation, Fg, that can reach the atmosphere is only 0.2.
It will be tricky to think this through, but I'll give you guys a chance. Does anyone want to
volunteer an answer as to what does this tell you about the atmosphere and its ability to let energy
go through it? Yes. Absolutely. Have you seen this before? You're just thinking.
I've seen it before. Exactly. So to put that differently,
solar radiation passes through the clear atmosphere. The atmosphere's composition of gases
is such that most of the sunlight comes through the atmosphere and it only starts to heat up
the surface. It doesn't heat the atmosphere. OK. Which is remarkable. I mean, it's 0.9.
And that is why we can have a warm surface and get clouds. Because when you put a pot of water on
the stove to boil it, where do you put the heat? At the bottom. And it gets hotter and hotter until
it boils. Now we have a strange system where the sun's energy comes from the top,
but the atmosphere doesn't see it. It warms the surface. The surface then gets warm enough
to release long wave radiation and or infrared radiation. It's emitted from Earth's surface,
but some of the infrared radiation is absorbed and readmitted by the greenhouse gases in the
atmosphere, which then keeps the, this warms the surface more and it keeps the lower atmosphere
warm. And so that's why the thunderstorms, where you live in a place where there's thunderstorms
in the afternoon, it's because the sun is spending all of the morning heating the surface
and evaporating water from the lakes and from the plants and from the oceans.
And then enough moisture is put into the atmosphere that clouds develop later on.
And it's because the sun warms the surface. And so in much the same way a pot boils
from the bottom up, the atmosphere boils from the bottom up.
And so the satellite images we saw yesterday of big thunderstorms, those big white clouds,
it's the atmosphere boiling because the sun's heating it at the bottom.
Okay. Yeah.
So if the sun arrives like this,
which is basically at the equator or within the tropical area,
that 1,370 watts per meter squared, almost all of it hits the surface at a meter squared. Okay. So
is a useful prop.
Yeah, let's take my hand. So my hand is that size, it hits that whole area. But now let's go to England.
The same hand comes in.
And it's going to, it doesn't work with the hand, but it's going to get spread over a lot
more surface area. So the same amount of energy is coming in. But by the time it has spread out
across the surface area, because it's coming in like this, and then there, all of it hits the
surface. But the further north or south you go, then that same thing is spreading out over much
more area. Okay. And so the watt per meter squared of solar energy landing in the town of Reading,
where I live in the UK at the moment, is much smaller than if I was living in Nairobi.
Makes sense? Okay. So I've got a set of videos I'll send you,
which the Met Office actually in the UK has made, which talks about that. It's differential heating.
So it means that the tropics near the equator, so Africa, gets a lot more sunlight to heat it up
than further north and south, because the energy that comes from the sun is spread out over a larger
surface area. So we're at this point, we said greenhouse gases, and we know that basically
we say the atmosphere is transparent to shortwave radiation. The radiation can come straight in.
Those of you that know about the ozone hole, the ozone layer,
ozone is a molecule which is O3. So it's three oxygen atoms together. It's quite an unstable
molecule, and it's very reactive to the sun. And in the atmosphere, we actually have different layers.
We won't talk about it too much. But ozone is in the stratosphere. It's above where the airplanes
fly, above the weather. And it means that actually, if you go into the stratosphere,
it gets warmer with height, because ozone gas, when the sun hits it, it does warm it up.
So the only thing in the atmosphere that's not really transparent to
the shortwave radiation is the ozone molecule. But most of the gas that is keeping us
warmer at the surface here is greenhouse gases. How does that actually look? It looks like this.
This is the radiation transmitted by the atmosphere. So this is sunlight. Most of it is
coming in the visible part of the spectrum. Here's the UV radiation, which is bad for sunburn.
And this is the total absorption and scattering. So there are particles, the gases absorb and
scatter. But then also little dust particles can scatter. So if you live in a place like the Sahara,
or even much of southern Africa, before the rains come, there's a lot of dust in the air,
or smoke in the air, and that will scatter energy as well. But the absorption is the way that ozone
absorbs energy and re-emits it, or four other things. And here you can see what we've seen,
is that the atmosphere, the percentage of radiation which is being absorbed or scattered by the
atmosphere in the sunlight part is very little. So gray means big absorption, less absorption.
So this part here, this worst UV, this total absorption scattering of 100 percent, that's what
ozone does. So if not for ozone, UV radiation would be coming into Earth all the time. It would have
destroyed all of the cells of plants, animals, and us. But we have this ozone, which means that this
most damaging part of radiation for biological systems has been removed from the atmosphere
before it gets to the surface. There is a little bit left. We then made an ozone hole, so we're
getting more of this UV than we should. And finally, you see that all of this is clear.
So all of that solar energy can come in, which is what, you know, we had said.
But now let's move to the area where Earth is emitting radiation. So Earth is emitting radiation
in this area here. And
possibly this is an important part, is that this red, so the red curve at the top, the line is
telling you the spectrum of the radiation, okay, and then the shading is telling you how much of
it is being transmitted by the atmosphere. Okay, so when we come to Earth, you can see that this blue
line is showing, I think these are for different latitudes of the atmosphere, so the different
surface temperature. In the Arctic, it's going to be cooler, and at the equator, it's going to be
warmer. But that blue line is showing you the total amount of energy that is Fg, the ground is
emitting out, the distribution of it across different wavelengths. But then this shading
is telling you the part of the spectrum which is actually being transmitted to space. So the point two,
what we are seeing here, is that there's point nine and there's point two, okay.
This point two that does come out the top
is only coming from this part here. So this is what we call a transmission window.
It's a part of the atmosphere where the energy just leaves the atmosphere, okay.
But this part and this part is very much absorbed or scattered, okay.
And now, final point, well, what's doing all of that absorption and scattering?
These are the main gases doing it. And so you can see water vapor, so water in its gas
is the biggest control. So the fact that Earth has, is of a temperature that we can see,
is of a temperature that we can have water in the oceans, water vapor in the atmosphere,
and then a little bit of ice in other places, means that the atmosphere can capture a lot
of that radiation and re-radiate it back to the ground. And so the temperature of the surface
is much warmer than it would be, okay. And then we come to carbon dioxide. So carbon dioxide is
not as strong as water vapor as you can see, but there is a big chunk of this emission,
which carbon dioxide blocks. The astounding thing here is that the carbon dioxide concentration
is very tiny. So the atmosphere that we live in is, does anyone know this, what the percentages are?
So it's something like 70 percent nitrogen, 78 percent nitrogen, and then depending on how
what your altitude is, but something like 20 percent oxygen, okay. And then like 1 percent
carbon dioxide, or even less, it's a very small amount, okay. 0.03, so you're looking it up as
we go, or you know it, you know it's good. 0.03, okay. So it's a tiny amount of carbon dioxide
that's doing this amount of absorption and scattering, okay. And then we can go oxygen
and ozone. So this is what I was saying, ozone is the thing that keeps the UV part of the spectrum
away from us, and you know some other things, methane as well. So if you wanted to
change the amount of radiation that can be emitted by the atmosphere,
what's going to be the easiest thing to do?
Okay, is that easy to do? How do we do that? Yeah, emit more carbon dioxide. Yeah,
how do we emit more carbon dioxide? We burn oil, we burn coal. We can do that.
It's easy to do, and that's what we've been doing. So this is the part we've been adding to, okay.
Now there are a number of more slides, and we don't need to go through all of them,
because I think this is the key thing I wanted to to show you, is that it all comes down to
how much greenhouse gases there are, particularly carbon dioxide. If you want to know what the
uncertainty is, there's the water vapor feedback. So water vapor is the strongest greenhouse gas,
and if we put more carbon dioxide so the whole atmosphere warms up by one degree,
how much more water vapor is there now in the atmosphere, and how much does that change this?
Okay, and that's where a lot of the uncertainty in being able to say the future comes from.
I'll show you one picture about that. Yes. So basically, these gases, they are responsible
for the air, retaining most of the heat, instead of emitting them back to the surface.
Yeah. Okay, so that's why we have a comfortable planet to live on,
and there's also now why we have a problem. Well, we didn't always have this problem, so
it wasn't always thought of in this way. So here are a bunch of people that came to understand it.
So there's a woman who did some experiments, they were sort of scientific, and they were interesting
in the United States, Eunice Foote in 1856. But as John Tyndall, he was a working-class man,
grew up in a poor part of London, started working as a technician in the Royal Institute's basement,
and ended up becoming an excellent scientist. And he showed that curve I've just shown you before
about which gases absorb where, he was the one that really started to do very good experiments
to show us this. Once we had that, a Swedish person called Svante Arenas was actually the
first one to calculate the extent to which greenhouse gases might increase as surface
temperatures. So what Arenas did is he took this model, he made rather than one layer,
he made many more layers. Because the atmosphere actually changes as you go up. So most of the
water vapour is within the first three kilometres above the surface, and if you go up to 10 kilometres
above the surface, there's very little water vapour. And so if you want to do a better calculation,
you make many more layers. And then you say, well, okay, how much goes through the next layer and
comes back down, energy comes back down. And you just essentially are computing the radiation balance
for the ground and each individual layer above it. Maybe you do 10 layers, you do this calculation
to find out the distribution of temperature in the atmosphere,
turns out the atmosphere is warmer at the bottom and cooler at the top,
and to find out the temperature of the ground.
But, and then it comes on to this man. This man actually was a, oh, I'm getting confused now.
No, he was an engineer, he wasn't a post office worker, but he would come home and he would just
do the calculation himself in 1938. And he was the one that estimated how the emission of carbon
dioxide will change Earth's temperature, okay, building on Svante Arenas' work.
The interesting thing about Svante Arenas is that around this period, so from about 1850
onwards, they were starting to understand, the geologists were starting to understand
that at some point in the past, Europe had been covered in this massive sheet of ice.
There were these very big boulders in forests in France. There were no mountains around.
And the only way that you could explain for these very big boulders to be there
was that there had been a massive sheet of ice. And the only way that you could explain
for these boulders to be there was that there had been a big ice sheet carrying these boulders.
And so, you know, you and me, if we lived in 1880, we would be reading books about the ice age
that covered Europe. I mean, maybe we wouldn't because you're in Africa, it didn't. But you
read the books about the ice age that covered Europe and everyone's scared. Are we going to
have another ice age? Oh, no. The Industrial Revolution started. We know that we're burning
fossil fuels, coal, it's making carbon dioxide. And Svante Venis computes this. And he says,
ah, us burning the fossil fuels, it's going to prevent another ice age. So at that time,
it was a good thing. We're not going to have the ice age. We are saving ourselves from an ice age
because we are increasing carbon dioxide concentration. It's different now,
a hundred and thirty years later. Guy Callender was the one that said, well, how much is that
going to change? And this is global temperature change. Yes. So we need to have a balance.
Otherwise, things are just going to get hotter and hotter. It can take a while for Earth to get
the balance. So if you change the composition, maybe think about it mathematically. What we're
doing is we're changing this point two to be something like 0.2001 and then 0.2002. Eventually
0.201. So we're decreasing this value. This is going to like 0.019. And so the whole system has
to change. But ultimately, you still need the balance of energy coming out and in. So this
balance will be maintained. But you are changing this number in the equation, which means that you
end up changing. You can do the math if you wanted to. Go ahead and solve this equation,
but put 0.015 in this equation. Maybe that's if you wanted to do that as homework. Put 015 in
this equation and see what temperature comes out for the ground. So we're changing the way that
energy is maintained and re-emitted in a way that increases Earth's surface temperature.
OK. The balance at the top of the atmosphere is basically still going to be maintained.
It has to. And this is what Guy Callender did. So Callender wrote a paper in 1938 and he updated
it in 1961. And these are curves from his paper. The blue curve, no, the red curve,
and then the blue curve. OK. And this is also, you know, you get volcanoes. Volcanoes can change
the amount of energy that comes down because you put up a lot of volcanic ash, the sun gets
reflected more and such. But these are Guy Callender's curves. Here in black. And remember,
he made that curve. Yeah, that here and that here. And this is actually now the best modern
recording of how temperature changed. So he made the prediction of these temperature changes
based on the emission of greenhouse gases. And this is what our observed record does.
So what he did without a computer, just by doing calculations on a page,
was an incredibly accurate representation of what we've actually observed over that period.
OK. So there's a number of other slides about the distribution of radiation climate models.
Perhaps. Perhaps the most important one is the first set of models that came out of Princeton.
So Geophysical Dynamics Laboratory in Princeton. So this is the place where George Philander,
we spoke about yesterday. This is where he went into this PhD. It was a good place to go and do
that because they were running climate models at the time. So they built the first climate models.
They were very crude, big mathematical boxes which represented all of Earth's surface
and all of this radiation through the different layers of the atmosphere.
And they ran experiments where they could run the model with the concentration of carbon dioxide we
had observed in whatever year it was that this experiment ran. Oh, I have it here. Yeah,
so mid 1970s and into 1980s they were running these. And then they take that model and they
simply double the carbon dioxide to see what happens to the temperature. Or they quadruple
the carbon dioxide concentration to see what happens. And this is where experiments,
why you need models, is because you can run experiments. We can't really do this with our
world because it takes too long to find out. And when you, yeah, okay, I don't have time to go
into this, but you can go and look up the North Atlantic Thermohaline Circulation Intensity.
It's about how much warm water moves across the whole Atlantic Ocean up towards Greenland.
Okay. And essentially that movement of warm water up keeps Europe warm.
And if you double CO2, the warm water moving up decreases. And if you quadruple it,
it just stops going up anymore. Okay. But this is the way these experiments run.
There were a couple more that followed. So Ben Santer is still doing science.
And this was it. And then there was TETS as well. And what they do is they run an experiment,
in this case, where they just put the carbon dioxide concentration in for 1986 to 1995.
Okay. They say, right, we'll put that carbon dioxide in. Then they run another experiment
for the previous period, 1961 to 1980. Okay. So they're looking at the difference between
an atmosphere where you put 1960s carbon dioxide in and an atmosphere where you put
1980s carbon dioxide in. And then they plot the difference. Okay.
And this is what emerges. So that's the observations. This is possible because of
all the radiosons, the weather balloons that were being released. They can see how
temperatures distributed through the atmosphere. Okay. And the model experiments
show that if you just have greenhouse gases, that is the warming that would be observed.
If you have greenhouse gases and sulfates, so sulfates are the aerosol particles that
are most common. They're emitted by things like volcanoes. They also are emitted by
dirty coal from power stations. And you can see that there's a slightly different pattern.
And then if you include ozone, because this is the time when the ozone loss was happening,
you end up getting an even colder stratosphere. Remember, ozone keeps the high atmosphere warm
because of its interaction with sunlight. And so that ends up being a model where the change
between the previous decade and the current decade is actually somewhat similar to the
observations. And it's a very important result to show us that while global warming might warm
the surface of Earth, as we have shown you yesterday, this is the warming at the surface.
You can see maybe it's half a degree. Yeah, maybe it's up to half a degree or so.
There's actually a lot more warming higher up in the atmosphere. Okay. And so this relates to
what I was answering to your question earlier. Okay. So we have models that can do these sorts
of experiments. You are welcome to go and look at these slides, which will become available.
This is actually a more complicated one that shows you, again, in watts per meter squared,
how the energy is being moved through the whole system. So it gets far more complicated
because we have to think about clouds reflecting energy. We have to think about
stuff being reflected by clouds, being reflected by the surface. And if you were to add up,
so that number, outgoing longwave radiation and reflected solar radiation, those two numbers,
107 and 235, add up to 342. Okay. 342, so remember we said the solar constant is 1307.
But that's if Earth was a flat disk. But because Earth is a sphere, if you were to compute the
ratio of a flat disk to a half sphere surface area, I think you end up with 342. So that's
what happens if you spread out 1370 watts per meter squared over, rather than a flat sphere,
you spread it in a surface, you spread it out of a sphere. Okay. So that's like average of everything.
So there's a lot more going on. This tells you about how models have advanced through
time. And we will come back to that on Friday. Yes.
To me, it shows that there's a kind of evolution of energy. And then since we have that E equals
MC squared, and we know that the lowest form, like every mass or every object's limit of light or
something like that. Is it not like some of these, maybe some of this energy can be lost
in some light or something like that? No, not in this context. So the physics
that we need to describe the atmosphere is essentially classical physics.
And classical means before Einstein, loosely speaking. So Einstein gave us special relativity,
general relativity, and ultimately E equals MC squared, which showed that at the scale of
the atomic nucleus, you can get a conversion from mass to energy. Okay. To make an atomic bomb,
it works because E equals MC squared. So you can turn mass into energy in very high energy
compressed situations. But the physics that we're dealing with here is very far away from that.
Okay. And so these physics flows, and this is essentially the thermodynamics that came
out of classical physics, and also was developed because of the Industrial Revolution. So a lot of
this fundamental thermodynamics was developed because they were trying to have the physics,
which could more precisely solve for energy within steam engines and steam systems.
So these sorts of thermodynamics come out of a branch of classical physics called
statistical mechanics. So it's about the statistics of molecules and their energy
and the transfer of that. Okay. So it's not to say that E equals MC squared.
That is true, but in this context, we don't need to work with it. It's the same for the equations
of motion that we'll just start looking at tomorrow. We don't need to think about special
relativity because the speeds that we're dealing with are so far away from the speed of light.
And so we can just use Newtonians equations of motion. So yeah, basically classical physics
comes from Newton and thermodynamics and such. And then Einstein comes with relativity, and then we
end up with what followed next with relativity and ultimately quantum theory and such.
So I have one more slide for today. You can go and look at the other slides, slides yourself.
We can build models therefore, which built into the mathematics of those models, there is
the sensitivity of the atmosphere to the concentration of carbon dioxide. Okay. So then
you can change the concentration of carbon dioxide. And that's how you create these,
if you've heard of the IPCC, so the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change,
what it does is it collates all of the climate science together. And one of the things that they
do are climate projections. They're not predictions because we don't know how much fossil fuels we're
going to be emitting in 2050. They're climate projections, they're guesses. And you use different
scenarios. So this was from the cycle of IPCC models that ended in 2014. And you have a
representative concentration pathway 8.5. It turns out those numbers are actually determined
by changes in the amount of back radiation. So that 342, it comes down to this over here.
Next one back. No, we are on that side. This back radiation, which is
emitted by the surface and reradiated back, representative concentration pathways are
estimates of how much greenhouse gas would produce an additional 8.5 watts per meter squared coming
back or an additional 3.5 watts per meter squared coming back. So if you're wondering where those
numbers come from, that's where they come from. So essentially, we emit very little greenhouse
gas in the blue curve. And so that number goes from 342 plus 2.6 watts per meter squared coming
back. And then we go all the way to this one, 8.5. So we burn all of the coal and all the
fossil fuel that we possibly can, and we end up here. In reality, that's not going to happen.
Like in reality, we are probably somewhere here, possibly. But that's what the average of all the
models say. And this is where the biggest problem in climate science really is, is that you give all
the models the exact same concentration of the way in which the concentration of carbon dioxide
will change into the future, and then you run the models to see what global temperature they give
you. This is the global temperature change. The red shading is the spread of the model's answers.
So some models, you give them that concentration pathway of greenhouse gases,
and they say that Earth by 2100 is going to be
two and a half degree warmer. So yeah, this goes to 2100, this goes up here. So
let's stick with 2100 because it's still our lifetimes.
Other models will say, oh, if you emit that much greenhouse gas, the global mean temperature is
going to be five degrees warmer. That range from two and a half to five degrees is the uncertainty.
Even at this one for 2.6, you can see that there's an uncertainty from
almost zero warming to almost two degrees warming. So these are the number of models
that go into this. So these are 59 models. That's the uncertainty across those models.
Those are 32 models. And that means that we don't know if we can emit a certain tonnage of
carbon dioxide. We don't know how much warmer the planet's going to be.
And trying to narrow that uncertainty has been the biggest challenge within climate
science for a long time. And it comes down to the way that all of these processes of clouds,
water vapor, feedback on each other. And it might also just be that it is a very uncertain system.
That is too difficult to predict. But this is where we are at with climate science at the moment.
And it means that if you live in a country where global warming is already making your country
far hotter, you could believe this one. And you could say, we can't have Botswana getting this hot.
We won't be able to grow any more, you know, farm cattle anymore. It'll be too hot. It'll
just become Botswana becomes a desert. And then you might have another country that says, oh,
it's okay. It's going to get warmer for us. It's already cold in our country.
And so that's where the politics comes in and the ethics. And yeah, we just haven't been able to
narrow this uncertainty for like, basically 40 years of climate science. So yeah.
So those are based on different scenarios of carbon emission.
Sorry?
The fruits are based on different scenarios of carbon emission.
Yes. So every time they, but the first thing they do with a IPCC cycle is they sit down and
make guesses of how society and the globe might look. And then based on that, they make a guess
of what the potential scenarios could be for emissions. They like storylines. They say,
this is a world in which everyone's fighting. Everyone's trying to get all the oil they can
and burn as much as they can. Well, this is a world in which everyone is cooperating.
They are sharing technology, renewable energy. We're moving to a cleaner society.
And they make up these different stories to guess what the future might look like for 100 years.
So there's a question about, this will come into later in the week. But basically,
can machine learning improve a lot of these model processes? And if it can improve the model
processes and their representation, can we end up with better climate projections because we can
have lower uncertainty? And we, I think, have almost a confirmed lecture on a model called
Neural GCM, which is possibly one of the models that's the closest to being able to actually
do this type of work in the future. And actually, there's two students in the class that are doing
their projects. So they, from previous years cohort, so Malden being one and Lionel another,
who are looking at whether you can use a thing that's tricky enough, the other lecture I
developed for weather prediction of rainfall, whether you can use it to actually turn your
GCM's rainfall into accurate forecasts for Kenya or East Africa. But you can catch them and ask
them about the challenges and interesting things of that. Okay, I don't think I have anything else
to say, but basically, climate is a thermodynamics problem. It's about the balance of energy.
And when you talk about it being a boundary value problem,
what do you think is the boundary for climate, which we are discussing in climate change?
What is the boundary value that we set?
You're all thinking the carbon dioxide concentration, right?
The carbon dioxide concentration, that changes. We don't know what the world looks like with more
carbon dioxide. We don't have that data. So for machine learning to directly solve it in a purely
data driven approach, it's not really going to work. Okay.
