Okay. Screen is shared. Good. So for today's lecture, we're going to look at modern weather
and climate models. In the email I sent you yesterday, there were these three links. Did
any of you have a chance to watch them? No. Okay. So in revising for your class quiz on Monday,
the class quiz will happen in this Monday lecture slot, 8.30 to 9.30, and then we'll carry on with
practical. Yeah. Revise these. They're quite nice videos. They'll explain a lot of what we've covered
in the lectures, but with nice graphics and someone explaining very clearly. And there is
a longer list of things. So this is what I've just been explaining on the board using the
stickman examples. Yes. These ones? No, they're like five minutes long. They would just be useful
to help in your revision. So you don't, I'm not going to test you on what's in these videos. I'm
going to test you on what the lecture was, but watching these videos might be helpful for just
bringing more of it together so it makes a complete picture in your mind. That's all.
Yeah. Okay. So as we said, filter for scale, get the chosen scalings. Much of the fundamental
flow of the atmosphere is held within the Navier-Stokes equation, such as geostrophic balance or
planetary wave, Rosby wave propagation. Now, that equation is a very nice way to write it out. We
can write it out showing, you know, the derivatives more fully. And we have the Navier-Stokes
equation. We spoke about the thermodynamics continuity equation. You can't create to
destroy air, so divergence in the lower atmosphere must make air rise and converge higher.
For example, sink converge higher up. And ideal gas law, moisture conservation. Okay.
There's one aspect in here which we haven't covered. The only scaling that happens in these
primitive equations is that rho density only depends on pressure. So that equation includes
sound waves. When I'm talking to you, what's happening is sound waves are changing the density
of the air just a little bit at a very high frequency and then they're coming and then it
hits your eardrum. And it's just because the density of the air as the wave is traveling is
oscillating a bit like this. Okay. We do not need sound waves when we're doing weather prediction.
And so what we do is we say, no, the density is fixed. The only thing that changes the density
of the air is how much air is above it. So this is about pressure. So if you have a parcel of air
that's at the top of the atmosphere, there is not much air pushing down on it. Okay. But if you have
a parcel of air near the bottom of the atmosphere, this air is pushing to the surface at a thousand
hectopascals. Okay. So newton meters per second. Newtons per square meter. Okay. And that means
that if you think of the air as being a box, the top of it is pushing up at the rest of the atmosphere
at maybe 999.9. Okay. Because the air is squashing itself. So the air is more dense at the surface,
it is less dense higher up. Okay. But that's the only thing that controls the density of the air,
which means that we have ignored sound waves. Okay. This type of approximation is called a
Boussinesq approximation. You may have seen it in the textbook if you looked, but other than that,
the information's all there. Okay. Right. How are we going to solve this? You're mathematicians,
some of you are computer scientists. What are we going to do? Anyway, what's the big word we're
going to use? Well, not even a big word, small word. Discretization. Exactly. That's how we
construct a numerical model. We're going to divide it into latitude, longitude, and level pixels,
essentially, or boxes. Okay. Why is it a blank slide? It's animated. So we have Navier and we
have Stokes, a Frenchman and a British person. Happens in mathematics often. After the time,
they find that two people discover it at the same time and then they give it Navier-Stokes
rather than just Navier's equation. Okay. So Newton's equation gives us how objects move,
how planets orbit. Okay. Navier-Stokes is basically the Newtonian equation for fluids.
Why and how fluids move change their speed. This man, Lewis Fry Richardson, he was a pacifist. He
didn't want to go to war, but he ended up driving ambulances during the First World War.
And during First World War, they needed weather forecasts. And he actually, in his spare time,
started to do computations to try and, in the first instance, discretize the equations.
And in 1922, he wrote a book in which he described this big theater in which you had the central
person here, the central mathematician, telling little groups of mathematicians
in all of these little boxes around here what computations to do. Okay. He was thinking about
how you discretize the equations and then get the computation because what happens is you are now
computing. If you think about this being it, you're wanting the wind speed on this line over here.
Well, then you want to compute the pressure difference between these ones. Okay. And that
pressure difference, well, let's see how warm it is compared to these different ones. And so,
you have many people doing the computation, sending this information back to the central
mathematician, and you can then make the forecast. That's exactly how it works in a computer.
You have the central processor and then the equation is farmed out to a supercomputer
in parallel. The parallel, the compute nodes can all talk to each other, so you can be passing
information across and the central compute node is keeping track of everything that's going on.
So, it was pretty good. 1922, they didn't even have any computers and he's like, well, this is
how you need to compute it. Obviously, he was British. And so, the new Met Office, so in the
UK, there's the Met Office, Metrological Office, their new compute, their new model they're
producing is called Al Frick in recognition of his work. It turns out, Al Frick, they are working
very hard to make it quick, but they're having a lot of problems with the numerics of that model.
And so, we discretize the equation. That is how it looks. And you now have a whole set of
pixels and you can solve. The problem with this type of grid, which is a lat long grid,
which is the first one they used, is as you get to the top of the earth,
your latitude and longitude boxes get smaller and smaller and smaller. So, over here,
you might be solving for 200 boxes over the whole circumference of earth. And over here,
you still are solving for 200 boxes, but over just the Arctic or similarly the Antarctic.
And so, in the last 20 years or so, they have started to use different types of grids. So,
this is an example of triangles. There's a model called Icon. That is the German one.
So, we saw that on Windy. I said there's Icon. And that's because that's an icosahedral grid.
So, that's a slightly different shape. And then you can make an even
tessellation of these tiles across its surface.
So, maybe you've seen the next slides. Maybe you know what's coming next. What else do we
discretize? This is discretizing only in space. So, that equation, as we said, it's a continuous
equation. It's defined continuously, but we need to discretize in time. So, why does
higher resolution matter? We'll come on to that, but you can go and read more about that
over here, if you wish, and about why grids matter. There's another link to a paper here
about different time integration strategies. Now, here is an example where you have
small fast processes. And we'll come to this now. So, subgrid processes, which we are
statistically solving. This works once you've seen some later slides, but it'll make sense.
So, you have some processes in the atmosphere that are fast. So, for example, the development
of a thunderstorm might be very quick, but you're not resolving it. You're doing a statistical
or mathematical approximation for the thunderstorm, but you need to do that quickly. And so, you have
lots of small time steps for the fast processes. But then those big waves in the atmosphere,
they are moving more slowly. And so, then you might do a bigger time step for those processes.
And so, you actually, even within the equations you're solving, you might have different speeds
at which you are time stepping and computing things. Now, the time step, there's something
called a Courant number. If you've done any CFD, you'll know about this. Has anyone heard of the
Courant number before? Courant. And that just tells you that if you have a very big grid,
and so wind is blowing at a certain speed, you could have a long time step. So, climate models
that have a big grid that might be 100 by 100 kilometers, their time step could be 60 minutes.
But if you come to a model which has kilometer by kilometer pixels, then the wind blowing
can change what's happening at those pixels quite quickly, and then your time step might
need to be 30 seconds. Every time step and every grid point adds up to the number of computations
that need to happen. So, if you only have boxes like this, you've divided Europe into very few
boxes. This is now what the mountains would look like in your model. This is only four Europe,
one, two, three, four, five, six, seven,
13 times seven,
91. So, there's 91 computations that will need to happen at every time step over Europe, okay?
And these are grid boxes, so you maybe only need to do that computation every 60 minutes.
So, if that's 91 times 60, I'm not going to do that very well in my head.
Let's say it's a thousand-ish, okay? Maybe a thousand computations are required
for you to do an hour integration of the equation because you just computed. That means if you're
doing it over a day, you only need 24,000 computations, okay? So, the number of
computations that you need to move your model forward is both the time step and the grid spacing,
okay? So, we said 24,000 needed to run one day if it's at this space or resolution, okay?
Now, you want to do a weather forecast, okay? You are going to need to run that for 10 days,
so now 240,000, okay? But a weather forecast is only useful if you finish it today. Like your
forecast, you're running it now. You need to finish it in the next three hours so that you can give it
to all the forecasters who can then put it on the web, on the phone apps and issue warnings if
there's a storm coming or something. And if you're wanting to do a climate forecast projection,
you want to do another 100 years, you can imagine that now we are looking at
millions of computations that need to happen, okay? And then the bigger your computer is,
the more computations a second you can do. We call it, you know, the measurement is in flops. So,
I can't remember how many flops we are at now with the biggest supercomputers,
but when we were first doing this, we did not have big supercomputers. And so, we made the
best we could do. We said, right, we can accept that for the future climate change simulation,
we need it to finish 100 years in three months. That's okay, okay? But as we wanted to get more
accurate, we have to improve things and we need the bigger computers.
Everyone with me still? Cool. So, it's quite simple. You can see that this is a very bad
representation of what the mountains look like. So, this is now going across along 47
north, so over here, through the Alps and it's showing you what in the model world the mountains
look like, okay? Now, in the real world, I don't have to draw it, but just to illustrate the point,
the mountains are going to have far more detail.
And if you live in this valley, there's no useful information because it's going to tell you,
oh, you're this high up. The higher up you go, the cooler it is. You'll never get the hot
temperatures that happen at the bottom of that valley, okay? And so, of course, as we went through
time, we improved resolution. And so, early on, boxes were big boxes like this and, you know,
in the very first models, you don't even have any layers of the atmosphere. And then you add more
and more layers, your boxes get smaller and smaller. And then as you do that, you can see
that, for example, in this case, Europe, the representation of the hills gets better and better
as you move to smaller and smaller pixels in the spatial sense, okay? So, these are assessment
reports. This is the information that goes into the IPCC climate change reports, which then
governments negotiate on about reducing carbon emissions. So, I can't remember what, and this is
the first assessment report, yeah, second assessment report, third assessment report,
and now we're on to assessment report four. So, this was completed in 2014, 2015 or so. So,
no, this would have competed early 2000s. We then went to AR5 and AR6, assessment report six,
and we are now on assessment report seven. So, they are now running models which are even higher,
but we're getting to very big storage considerations. This is just another example of it.
With this sort of model, if you, next time you fly back home, next time you're in an airplane,
look out the window and look at the clouds as you're going either taking off or coming down.
Hopefully, it's a cloudy place. You can see that there are sometimes very, very thin layers of
clouds, okay? And to represent that distribution of clouds through the atmosphere is very poor
if you are using those. So, you really want these higher resolutions, okay? So, that is about where
we act with most of these models today. That box, even if it comes down to nine kilometers,
is missing things. So, what you have here is a log scale of both the horizontal length scale of
processes in the atmosphere and the time scale of processes in the atmosphere, okay? And so,
when we think about thunderstorms,
afternoon rainfall that many of us have experienced with big thunderstorms, this is happening at these
sorts of length scales. So, we're on about 10 kilometers or a bit more. Time scales 10 to the
4, so divide that by 60 to get into minutes. If we go to El Nino, El Nino is at a much longer
time scale, okay? Now, we said that we have to truncate in space and in time, okay? So, let's say
that our truncation is in time over here, okay? So, we can't then have turbulence represented
in our flow. Now, turbulence is going to be very important for mixing things in the atmosphere.
It's going to be important for creating drag as well. So, you have laminar flow, which is smooth
and things go quickly, and you have turbulent flow. Most of the atmospheric flow is turbulence.
That means that this is not represented by the model grid. We then say, well, what's the spatial
scale? Well, I've shown you from the previous one, it might be 100 kilometers. That means
a whole lot of processes related to the development of thunderstorms are not represented, okay?
The equations can represent them, but what we are doing by having to
discretize the equations to solve them is we are truncating the processes that we can solve, okay?
So, primitive equations are always truncated. They're especially truncated in space,
but in time as well. So, what are we going to do about that?
Does anyone have past experience with what we do? Anyone want to suggest what we're going to do?
Okay, yeah. So, what we do is we call these processes sub-grid. So, they are below time.
They are below the grid scale. They are happening inside a grid box. We can't resolve them,
and that's where we have to do parameterizations. So, a parameterization in its simplest form
is at the grid. Let's actually draw it on the board quickly. That would be helpful.
Let's think about the fact that water can come from plants, okay? So, we need a way to estimate
how much moisture is coming from the plants, okay? So, part of the moisture in the atmosphere,
the change of moisture, we normally call moisture Q, change of moisture is somehow related
to what we call evapotranspiration, okay? But we do not have in our model a representation of the
leaf. What happens with this leaf is it's got very tiny holes underneath the leaf called stomata,
and these holes open, and they let the carbon dioxide in in order for the chemistry,
photochemistry of a leaf to happen, and they let water out. So, water evaporates out.
So, what a parameterization does is, okay, we need ET, right. Well, this ET is going to be
in some way related to, and so we will make some sort of equation which talks about, well,
we do know what the temperature of that grid box is, okay. So, what is the temperature?
I'm just going to do this as like terms, I have to make the relationship. It's going to be related
to how much moisture there is. So, if the air is very dry, the evaporation will be greater.
So, what is the moisture, okay? Also, if it's very windy, the winds can increase evaporation. It's
the same thing as if you put your clothes out on a windy day, it will get the wind dry more quickly.
And so, we have wind, so U and V. Temperature, moisture, U and V
are all things that we know about for each of these grid boxes. That grid box,
we will know temperature, moisture, U and V.
And all that our parameterization does is it builds this relationship, okay, so that we have a way
of computing the change of moisture in that lower part of the atmosphere that's seeing the leaves,
okay. And that's what a parameterization is. Often, these are derived empirically,
so people take a lot of observations in the field and they just in this way try and derive
the equation. And when it comes to something like turbulence, so we're thinking about,
right, the grid box is like this. Inside, there are mountains and trees,
and even a bad Christmas tree, okay. And we only know about U and V at this scale,
but we need to know what the drag is that is slowing the wind down because of the way in which
turbulence is operating, okay. In this case, they will do a whole set of five-minute-long
calculations, okay. In this case, they will do a whole set of boundary layer mathematics
to determine how the large-scale wind speed and the surface roughness interact to create
turbulence, okay. The end result is that out of this parameterization comes a drag number,
and that might just be a factor, so it might be, you know, simply 0.9, and that then is applied,
this is now times by 0.9, it's applied to the grid-scale winds to slow them down, okay.
A lot of different things need to be parameterized,
and the other thing is that we're not including the processes.
The processes can inform how we compute these parameterizations, but ultimately all that we
want is the effect of everything that happens inside the grid on the grid-resolved properties,
okay. That is what a parameterization does. Now, there are many things that need to be parameterized,
vegetation, albedo, this is how much radiation will bounce off plants, rainfall.
Rainfall is happening, as we described the other day, because H2O molecules
are condensing onto little bits of dust, they form a water droplet,
that water droplet stays in the air because there is some rising air,
but at some point it becomes too heavy for that rising air to keep it up and it will fall out of
the sky. That is happening at the scales of millimeters, and that is the amount of radiation
happening at the scales of millimeters, and our grid box is 100 kilometers, so it needs to be
parameterized, okay. Whether there's going to be a thunderstorm or not also needs to be parameterized,
and a whole lot of aspects around cloud which comes into this need to be parameterized,
and this is where a lot of the uncertainty in both climate modeling and where the prediction
comes from, and a lot of the work happens, and it's here where machine learning was first thought
to be the most powerful way to solve it, because even though some of the cleverest people in the
field were trying to say how do we do convection, I'll show you an example of how it's estimated in
a bit, they still end up with convection that's wrong. If you look at a climate model, I'll show
you why it's wrong in a bit, we have a video, and you then say well we actually also need to have
an ocean, if you want to do climate simulations it's not enough to have an atmosphere. At the
moment Neural GCM, Gencast, the models you will hear about in week three and week two, these are
only atmospheric models, they do not yet have an ocean, but for climate models you need an ocean,
same set of processes apply about parameterizing what happens in the ocean,
parameterizing everything in the grid box, and this is an example of you know the effect of the
parameterizations on the resolved grid. So as computers started to advance, we first were making
models that were just at the atmosphere, they might have some sort of land surface, they may
have a representation of plants, and they had ocean, and this has all been mathematicians
who know about geophysical fluids writing these equations, and then computer science helping
solve those equations quickly, and that means that even now a lot of the code is still in Fortran,
because they started to write this code in Fortran, the Fortran libraries became so optimized
that it just made sense to keep using Fortran, because it is so much quicker than modern languages
once you have done all of this optimization, and I guess it comes to what you're doing with the
matrix and tensor factorization and optimization course you're doing, is how do you do that quickly?
Okay, the Fortran libraries that do all of the mathematics solving these equations are very very
fast. We then started to have ocean models and atmospheric models coupled together around the
1980s, we also included sea ice because that matters a lot for the arctic areas, the poles,
and then we could have got to include more information around carbon, vegetation, aerosols,
more about ice sheets, upper atmosphere, so representing the ozone, you know representing
ozone in these models, they couldn't do it earlier because at the top of the atmosphere they maybe
had like only two layers, so yeah at the bottom of the atmosphere you have like 20 layers in the first
kilometer, and then at the top of the atmosphere you have like three layers, because you're interested
in what happens lower down, and we now have very complicated models which have many different
components, and so we are trying to model the earth system, we are trying to model how climate
is interacting with production of plants in the ocean and the rainforests on land, okay,
and that's because of all of this detail. Okay, let's all stand up and have a quick stretch,
because we're going to do convection, and convection is the atmosphere standing up
and mixing.
Okay, so we put a 100 by 100 kilometer grid box across here.
Okay, you can always sit down if you'd like to now.
Everything that's happening inside this box, all of these thunderstorms are being parameterized,
okay, and you would think that they could do some very neat beautiful mathematics
to make that parameterization, but no, instead they do choose your own adventure,
and this is not for lack of trying, these are you know people as smart as you are,
maybe some of them smarter, very good mathematicians, I mean maybe they'll be
starting anew, I don't know, maybe you could solve this. So the first thing is we calculate
the buoyancy, so remember I was speaking about buoyancy, it's how much warmer is that parcel of
air compared to the surrounds, is it going to rise, is that parcel of air like a hot air balloon or
not, and so they calculate the surface buoyancy, it's the tendency of this air to rise, and they
say well this buoyancy flux, how much extra buoyancy is being added to the air by the
evaporation, by the sun heating, so as the sun is heating things up it is increasing temperature,
which we are representing here as the symbol theta, theta is normally potential temperature,
okay we won't go into the detail, but it's basically saying okay how much is this changing,
how much is this going up, okay we know what the buoyancy flux is, is the buoyancy flux bigger than
zero, that means that is this air buoyant, ah yes it is, okay so if it says no, well no we're not
going to do any sort of convection, but the air is buoyant, very good, well let's launch this parcel
up and see what happens, and estimate the lifting condensation level, so this is where you take the
air and it rises up, condensation happens and it turns into a cloud, so this is where you have the
cloud base, okay so they find what is the lifting condensation level, then we estimate something
called the level of neutral buoyancy, so if that air isn't very buoyant it's going to rise a little
bit and then stop, it's when it's neutrally buoyant, so imagine a hot air balloon, they're going to take
you on hot air balloon rides over the Serengeti, I don't know if you've seen those videos,
and they put only half a cylinder of gas in and they start heating that hot air balloon up,
it can't get very high, okay, if that level of neutral buoyancy is actually very high,
so that parcel is very, it's got a lot of energy, it's very buoyant, then they say well is it bigger
than this value, so is the neutral buoyancy 400 meters higher than where it forms a cloud,
ah okay good, is it actually even higher than three kilometers, okay yes that's good, okay
is that temperature at that level less than zero, that means have you got high enough that you're
actually in the freezing levels of the atmosphere, oh it is, okay well then let's make the deep
convection parameterization come on, this will come on, it will take these warm parcels in that
grid, it will move them up in the atmosphere, as they move up it will create precipitation,
it will do the latent heating, it will change the whole profile of temperature within this column,
as the convection happens it'll say okay well this was how the temperatures existed in that column,
we've called the convection scheme, that convection scheme is going to cool the surface
because it's taking warm air up and it's going to warm up the higher atmosphere as the energy
from the surface is moved higher up, okay and so once that convection scheme is called you've
changed the whole vertical profile of temperature but you're doing that when there's so much detail
happening, okay and it turns out that those models have just not done a good job, now unfortunately
so if you watch this animation if you do it through Google Drive it should be slower,
for some reason if you do a PowerPoint on a Mac it makes these animations far too quick
but over here you have a typical model, now this one actually even has good boxes that are smaller
they are 25 by 39 kilometers so they are very small boxes but this one has boxes that are four
by basically five by five kilometers, okay so there is a box that goes from here to
Prishok, okay rather than in this case a box that is covering from here all the way to Cape Point,
okay and in this one you can actually turn off this whole convection scheme
and you can allow the Navy of Stokes to make the convection itself.
So we have been doing a lot of work analyzing how when you do this for Africa you can improve
simulations and this is actually work within my research group that we've been doing
so we're actually running this model so that is a model simulation of the atmosphere the grid box
in this case is two kilometers by two kilometers and that is what I was showing you before was a
satellite animation, this is now a model so you know at first order it's very impressive
that we can have created a computer model that really looks like the satellite animation,
okay I mean do you agree does that look like a satellite animation to you?
Yeah so we're using this to actually see if we have explicit convection like this
so no parameterization scheme can we improve the simulation of how over the next three weeks so
this is starting in October how over the next three weeks or three months the rainfall moves
down into the rest of southern Africa okay that's what we are using this for.
This is summarizing what I've already told you there's quite a nice video here
we may as well have a look at it it's just really quite pretty
so
okay no
irritating
so
everybody today I'm going to talk about if you take those equations
and you do the opposite thing so you don't filter for the larger scales and you say I'm
actually only going to focus on the small scales and I'm just going to model a single storm that
produces a tornado it's the opposite to what we've been doing you can end up with simulations that
look like this this is the process of tornado genesis we have a vortex merger that occurs
and then we have two more vortex mergers that occur but we now we have 60 meter per second
winds of the surface calling that tornado time with the red t that's flashed up
this the vortex continues to strengthen and we have the third vortex merger right here that is
very important it really starts the whole ef5 part of the simulation going now looking at storm
relative horizontal winds and the volume rendering and ground relative winds at the surface now it's
a tornado I'm just showing at the surface the tornado strength winds you can see the tornado
doesn't really rage for right away it gets going at ef0 ef1 strength and then it's right about at
this point right here where you start to see a really strong growth a very strong bottom up
signature in the horizontal wind speed which is what we're showing in the volume rendered here
volume rendering here so the bottom up portion is very strong in this but it's sort of after
it's started becoming it so that's just a pretty video more than anything else
to show what happens if you actually say right we're going to do a truncation that looks like
this so there's still a truncation here but we've we can't represent anything about global
climate in those simulations okay um still when they do that rendering of the vortex tubes it's
it's incredible
okay so when we are doing climate change
as you just you've realized a climate model its main goal is to think about how
earth's surface temperature and rainfall and other things will change as the composition
of the atmosphere increases okay so when you build a climate model one of the processes
well in all these models the key process that is being parameterized for a climate model
is radiation so clouds change a lot of this but ultimately
we are having parameterizations which ensure that we are solving for how the sunlight comes in
and the radiation leaves and when you change the composition as we saw from Tuesday
you change the amount of radiation that stays in the system before leaving and so you warm up
its surface so it turns out that the fundamental physics of creating a climate model and the
weather model are actually the same because those processes also matter for a weather prediction
but a climate model we are wanting to predict much further into the future
because we don't matter it doesn't matter what the actual weather is on a given day we're interested
in how that weather variable might change if the planet is warmer and so this climate variable
might be temperature for Cape Town and it can say well at the moment with the current
carbon dioxide in the atmosphere or if there was no carbon dioxide we can look and see that
the temperature range in Cape Town would be this but now in the actual world where we have carbon
dioxide a lot we've emitted a lot more the temperature is now shifted and so in Cape Town
when you have hot days these hot days end up being 35 degrees rather than if we didn't have
all of this carbon dioxide they might have only been 30 degrees okay and it doesn't matter when
the hot days occur the climate model is giving us the statistics so we are running these models
at fairly big pixels so the resolutions course 100 by 100 kilometers and we are interested in how
the statistics of the weather will change okay
weather prediction is a different problem weather prediction they want to tell you
very accurately what is the temperature going to be
tomorrow what is the temperature going to be next week at four o'clock in the afternoon okay
okay
so weather prediction is about telling you exactly where in the climatic distribution of temperatures
the temperature will be tomorrow or the next day it's also about saying in the climatic
distribution are there being tropical cyclones is there going to be a tropical cyclone hitting
madagascar next week or not okay and so weather prediction is trying to solve a different problem
from the climate change okay climate change is about what is the distribution the statistics
weather is saying actually what is going to happen what is the probability it's trying to
estimate the probability of the certain weather happening okay so
there is a little bit more in this lecture which i'm going to leave actually for
the start of the lecture on tuesday okay it fits well for the start of the lecture on tuesday
and we'll talk a bit about why you actually can't just run one weather prediction i mean you can
but why you actually need a few weather you need an ensemble of predictions to estimate
the probability but we will talk about that a bit more on monday
it comes down to some chaos theory which we can talk about on monday
okay and yeah this is the current forecast from yesterday afternoon for a tropical storm that
might turn into a cyclone to indeed hit madagascar you can see there are multiple the probability is
quite a wide distribution as to whether the storm will hit southern madagascar or go out into the
ocean
so there's two things i'd like to conclude on for today
the first is this in the 1980s the three-day forecast had this type of accuracy
okay so the 1980s the three-day forecast for whether it's raining over england or not
was maybe an accuracy up here 80 that's not bad but the 10-day forecast was 20 okay
and as we have gone through the decades through a lot of work on the parameterization schemes
on how to better discretize the grid on how to more accurate do accurately do the time
discretization and the time stepping to solve the equations from not hundreds but thousands of people
working on these problems in weather forecast centers across the world mathematicians and
computer scientists and atmospheric scientists who talk about processes we've been improving on
average about one day every decade so if we look here the seven-day forecast in the 1980s
had maybe a 50 accuracy and now in 2018 the 10-day forecast has that sort of accuracy
okay so we've had one two three four decades in this case to get three days more accuracy
right it's been slow going but it means that the hurricane forecasts with the hurricane sandy
that hit new york eight days out there was actually a forecast saying that this might happen okay
that's the first thing i wanted to say we're going to see how this curve looks
with the new machine learning models next week yes
uh yeah so uh monday of week three i think it's the monday yes it'll be in the new updated schedule
because shruti and i had a good discussion yesterday she'll talk about skill scores there
are many ways to measure skill i think in this case it's just how well it matches the pattern
of the 500 millibar geopotential height okay but um it's it's it's it's it's it's it's it's it's
um and also yeah you have northern hemisphere and southern hemisphere which is interesting you can
see that now the northern hemisphere skill and southern hemisphere skill is about the same
because they're very good at including satellite observations um whereas here they hadn't figured
that out fully and so because there are so many observations in the northern hemisphere the northern
hemisphere has better skill but no so false alarms are not in this particular accuracy
um but false alarms are part of a whole set of skill scores that we actually use
in in the field and shruti will talk a bit more about that and so this is quite a nice paper
it's a bit old now 2015 to talk about this picture but by next week sunday it'll be good
to have read this one because this one starts to talk about how machine learning can improve
these things okay um
the final thing i would like to say is that when we're thinking about prediction skill
what this curve says is that as you move forward in time
three days five days seven days ten days you get less and less accurate
this is the same thing the ability to predict drops off to be quite low at week two
we then have seasonal forecasting that's where your practical is almenio and some other things
as well as you will be looking at iod s iod gives us an ability to actually say is there going to
actually say is there going to be a drought or not so now this is seasonal forecasting
and then finally we're going to climb projections we can argue about whether that's a fair skill but
the confidence in time projections is it's going to get warmer
there's things to say as well about particular seasons changing
but there becomes some confidence as you just keep on putting more carbon outside into the
atmosphere we can have confidence with what we say about how the earth will be warmer and what
that might mean at the end of the century okay a lot of my own research is actually prediction
research at this time scale we know we can do something at the seasonal but for example when
are the rains going to start in a given year well we need the information here and it turns out it's
very difficult to get that information here and so a lot of my work is um i'm an optimistic person
by nature and i think that possibly with the new issue learning models possibly with some good
statistics with some very careful thought we can move that green curve to be a little bit higher
over here so that we can say three weeks away okay farmers in this area of zambia or south africa
farmers near bloomfontein we think your rains are going to be good for you to start planting
three weeks from now okay so that's where a lot of my work happens and that's why we're trying
to use these new models that have the thunderstorms in them okay so this is a summary you can go and
read this in your own time the main point is that both well we have to discretize these equations
we discretize them in space and in time and we can end up doing a prediction we are not we haven't
talking about ensemble prediction we will talk about that on tuesday and the other thing is that
both weather and climate models while developed to focus on different problems
they share the same fundamental primitive equations
and they have never stokes on a rotating sphere and the thermodynamic equations
but for climate models the thermodynamics are more important
okay um
what we've been talking a bit on and off about is this initial condition versus boundary
so the key message from this week which is important is that the weather prediction problem
is about your starting conditions and seeing how well you can carry forward
if the if the whole planet has this pattern of pressure today
what is it going to look like tomorrow what does that mean for wind and rainfall
and the next two weeks it's the starting conditions that matter the initial conditions
that's where you solve the equation forward for climate models it's the boundary conditions and
everyone together remind me what's the main boundary condition that is changing for climate change
carbon dioxide it's the atmospheric composition okay this is important because the machine
learning with graph neural nets can do a pretty good job at making the initial condition problem
and how expensive it is to run those models you know how many millions of computations have to
happen each second on this very fine grid resolution machine learning can solve that
and maybe do a really good job but for the boundary value problem machine learning has
to be used in quite a different way okay a purely data driven approach is not going to work okay
okay so happy to talk more about that but those are kind of the key important things to say
so these slides will be uploaded you can go and have a read you're welcome to have a read of
these slides watch of these animations as well but as I say we will talk more about
our initial condition sensitivity next week
before I close the slide deck today does anyone have any questions
