It's going to see if it is possible.
It might not be possible.
It's going to see if it's possible to somehow draw with the pen.
It's going to work.
It is.
Ah.
This is good news.
Okay, so the point of this lecture is about geophysical fluids.
So it's about the way that yesterday was all about the thermodynamics of climate.
Okay.
So let's draw Earth's surface and we'll keep it one color fine.
So Earth's surface looks, you know, something like that, it's a sphere, okay.
And then above that is the atmosphere.
And so pressure, we spoke about temperature and pressure in the observations lecture.
We didn't really say why pressure was so important, okay.
But pressure is a measure of how much atmosphere is above us, okay.
So it's the same as saying if I was to lie on the ground and I don't know, as children
maybe you did pylons where your friends all lie on top of you, who as children did that
with part of our life?
Yeah.
So you lie on the ground.
The pressure you feel as another child jumps on top of you gets greater and greater, okay.
Now when we measure pressure in the atmosphere, it's the same thing.
And it's about how much air is above us.
So basically how much gas of air, oxygen 78%, oxygen 20% and all the other things.
And that gives us essentially how much is pressing down on us at the surface.
On average for most of the planets, it's about 1013 hectopascals.
So pascal is the unit that we use for pressure.
That means Newton meter squared, Newton meter, Newton per square meter, okay.
Hecto is just saying one, is it 10 or is it 100?
I think it's 10, yeah, 100, okay.
So the surface pressure is going to be 1013 pascals, okay.
We just call it hectopascals.
The other thing that we use is something called millibars.
So millibars, so a bar is another atmospheric, another pressure term, so like one bar.
And millibars is a different way of calling it.
And essentially one millibar equals one hectopascal, okay.
So we would use them interchangeably as the vertical constant of height of the atmosphere.
And so at the surface, you will be at 1000 millibars or hectopascals.
At some point higher up, you're at 500 and as you get higher up, you're at 100.
The tropopause is normally around 100 millibars, maybe 200 millibars.
So that vertical line, okay.
So you can then, rather than thinking about the vertical components of the atmosphere
as being heights above the surface, it's useful to talk about it as pressure above the surface.
Now this is maybe where we are in Cape Town at 34 degrees south.
Given this understanding, at the equator, it's going to be, again, at the surface, about
1000 hectopascals.
Now Cape Town has a certain air temperature on average, and it gets cooler as you go up,
okay.
But in tropical Africa, tropical Amazon are the places it's warmer.
So if I was to go up in the atmosphere, do you think that I'm going to reach 500 millibars
at the same height as I am at Cape Town?
Do I have to go higher or lower?
Higher, yes.
So 500 millibars here will be higher.
And what about 100 millibars?
Even higher, okay.
And if we go to the poles, I won't ask you to do it because you get the idea.
We don't have to go very high to reach 500 millibars or 100, okay.
And so what we're saying is that that height is in the tropics about 14 kilometers, and
over here it's maybe 7 kilometers, okay.
We can draw a surface in the atmosphere, joining up all the 500 millibar points in
the atmosphere, and that surface we will call a geopotential surface, okay.
Now the geopotential surface is called the geopotential surface because it's the same
altitude, which means that the air mass below it or above it is about the same.
Well, you would think about it actually as the air pressing down at this level, okay.
Which means that in terms of its mass, it's the same, but this air parcel is at possibly
kilometers high, write that again, 7 kilometers, and this air parcel might be at 3 kilometers
above the surface, okay.
And that means that if you actually looked at this parcel, compared to that, it is a
bit higher, okay.
So geopotential, when we talk about a potential, it's about potential energy, which we will
not break on electronic pen, but as you do the work of picking pens up from the floor,
you have to use energy, okay.
And by the time I've come up to this height, I've used a certain amount of energy, that
is the potential energy of this.
So if this drops, it loses the potential energy from the floor to here.
This has more potential energy when it drops, okay, to this higher.
And so there is an aspect of particles having different potential energy and therefore falling
down, okay.
So a geopotential surface is a surface of the same pressure.
So pressure is the same, pressure is, yeah, whatever, it is equal everywhere along the
surface, but we can define the geopotential in terms of the height, okay.
And what that height gives us is the relative potential of air parcels.
So from a perspective of mass, the amount of atmosphere here and there is the same,
but from a geopotential perspective, this air parcel has more energy than that air parcel,
which means that there is a gradient that this parcel actually would want to move downwards
towards the equator, okay.
So it can't, because there's other air in the way and the mass is in balance, but its
potential, it can fall further than that, okay.
I mean, there's some half-blank faces.
Does it half make sense?
Is there anyone that would like to ask a question to make, have this make more sense?
Don't feel bad about if it makes no sense.
If it makes no sense, can you please put your hands up?
Yeah.
You say that the surface here, how about the geophysical surface?
Yes.
And that's the reason why the energy, even the energy of the geopotential, if you put
in the energy of the energy, it's not the same as the air.
Yes.
No sense.
Yeah, I don't understand the other way.
From the explanation, I thought the amount of, the mass of the air is the same.
Yes.
Here or there.
So the potential energy of the geophysical surface, if the mass are the same, I think
the potential energy is the same.
The mass of these two planes is the same, but this plane is further from the surface.
So the potential energy, the mass is the same, but the potential energy is different.
If you and I weigh the same amount, and I stand on the floor and you stand on the table,
you have, and by potential energy, it means it's like your potential, you know, we have
human potential, and by you coming to Ames, you have more of an opportunity for your potential
to be realized in the world.
So the opportunity you have here is because you have, you know, smart minds, you're committed
learners, you can do something good in the world, and, you know, there might be colleagues
you have at home who have similar potential, but you manage to make it to Ames, it's an
opportunity for your potential to be realized, okay?
So potential energy is a much simpler thing.
There is potential for both of these to fall, and they will pick up speed as they fall,
but the thing with more potential energy has more potential to fall further and therefore
faster, because it has all of this way to pick up speed, so gravity is pulling it down,
so it has more potential.
So we drop these, the green pen reached a faster velocity, it lost more energy as it
And so the atmosphere, while the mass might be the same, the tropical atmosphere has more
potential energy, and the atmosphere has this thing of, yes, we want to have all of the
mass spread out, but ultimately we would actually also like to have the energy, the potential
energy equivalence, okay?
But, and if the sun turned off, this might help, if the sun turned off today, we're going
to do it, dashed red line.
So the sun turns off today.
This atmosphere is going to go towards zero, to have the same potential energy everywhere.
It doesn't want the gradient, and so what will happen is the geopotential surface will
end up being like that, okay?
So what will happen is that the air that is high will fall so that it ends up with the
same potential energy as the air everywhere else, okay?
If the sun turned off today, why, what would change?
What would happen?
What does the sun do to Earth that we learned yesterday?
It warms it.
And because of that thing that I had with the notebook up and down, where does the sun
warm the most?
The tropics.
So the sun is warming the tropics most.
It's making these tropical temperatures, so T tropics, greater.
Because the sun keeps on making the tropical temperature greater, the geopotential of the
tropics is continually being kept above the resting state of the atmosphere, okay?
And the poles have a lower geopotential because this is where the energy is actually being
lost.
So it's cold, and more energy leaves the atmosphere from the poles than comes in, and so this
is always cooling, and so it ends up with temperature of poles is, yeah, so we end up
with T of poles is quite a lot less than, no, it's not quite a lot.
That should be just probably one inequality than T of the tropics.
Temperature of the poles for that atmosphere, I don't actually know what the average temperature
for the atmosphere is, but if you start at the surface, it may be minus 20 or minus 30,
and here we're looking at, you know, 30, okay, does that make sense?
So actually, we've ended up getting into the energetics of the atmosphere, which is
quite nice.
If you add up, so you have a resting state of the atmosphere, which is the dotted line,
but if you add up the energy of the atmosphere, for example, at the geopotential level of
500, how much higher is this than the resting line?
It will be in meters, so possibly we're looking at something like that resting state of the
500 millibar geopotential might be, rather than being seven kilometers, as we said here,
it might be only five and a half kilometers, okay?
That means that we have a difference of 1.5 kilometers or 1,500 meters, okay, difference,
for potential energy, you simply times that by gravity, so you times that by 9.8 meters per
second, which is gravity, and you end up with a number, so let's say that's 10, we end up with
a geopotential of 15,000 joules, okay, or as we would prefer to say, 15 kilojoules,
yeah, yes, mass, so it's height, and then yes, it's mass, which in the atmosphere would
use as density, so thank you, very good point, we've left out rho, which is the
density of the atmosphere, good, okay, so we include that, fine, it's more than 15 kilojoules,
but this is called available potential energy, A-P-E, available potential energy,
and the available potential energy, what's the energy that happens
when this is let go, what does the potential energy turn into, I know we have physicists in
the room, kinetic energy, so kinetic is a word for movement, I'm not sure if it's a Greek or
a Latin word, but kinetic means move, I'm full of kinetic energy, and there is a whole
body of really nice mathematics, which is about how available potential energy is turned into
is turned into kinetic energy, okay,
we'll have a look at what that kinetic energy looks like, any questions at the moment about this,
does that make sense?
Yes.
We will come to that in today's lecture, okay, I mean we started today's lecture from a slightly
different angle, but I think it's an important angle, so thank you for your questions, because
it's much more useful to actually start from here, who is not quite on the same page here,
who would like to ask any final questions so that this is 90% clear in their minds?
Yes.
Henry, what is the relationship between the pressure and the time period?
So, there's an equation called the ideal gas law, okay,
an ideal gas law looks like this, it's PV equals nRT, it's a long time since I was doing my
undergrad in this, the physicist, is that right, any part missing? Okay, so this is pressure, this is
volume, R is an ideal gas constant, and there's some assumptions that go into an ideal gas,
but for the atmosphere it's a very good approximation, and n, I think that's the molar,
like how many gas molecules there are, and so the key point here is that pressure and volume
are proportional to temperature, okay, and that means that
if you have PV proportional to temperature, as temperature goes up,
this side of the relationship, volume goes up while pressure comes down, okay, which means that
for a given parcel of air, we have two syringes, we have two boxes that are, so we have a box,
it has a certain number of gas molecules in it, the n part, this is a constant which is derived
empirically, although it possibly can be derived from first principles, and we start to heat this
on our fire, not a very good fire, but you get the idea,
the temperature starts to rise, okay, and if the size of this cube can
not expand, so it's a fixed cube, then all that's going to happen, because V is now held constant,
the pressure continues to increase, okay, but if this is a balloon, so it can expand, as it gets
warmer, the temperature, the volume will increase, okay, and so you can just get, for a warmer box,
you have a greater volume of the box, okay, and so
in the case of the atmosphere, the pressure is set by how much
atmosphere is above pressing down, okay, so we can't really change the pressure so much,
so we change the volume, so the equivalent parcel of air, when it is colder,
it has a smaller volume than when it is warmer, and in terms of kinetics, that's where you get to
statistical mechanics, what's happening is that the gas molecules here are gaining energy, so
temperature is a gross measure of the average kinetic energy of all of the gas particles,
and as the gas gets hotter, these little particles, we'll zoom in on one,
here is a gas particle moving around within the cooler box, but here is the same gas particle,
it's hotter, it has more kinetic energy, and it is now moving around
within the bigger box, so for the same amount of time it has, it moves a greater space, and so
basically what's happening is you have higher energy air, which means it takes up all space
because they are moving more quickly and they're colliding into each other,
so the physicists will know that, sorry if that was a repeat, but for those of you that
haven't done physics, hopefully that's helpful, okay, I mean it's a pretty fundamental thing
what I'm saying here, and you're like well hang on, why are you even saying that, okay,
does that make enough sense, yeah, okay, so climate is about how warm the atmosphere gets,
and that's firstly about the fact that the sun comes in and heats the surface,
and it's secondly about the fact that the composition of the atmosphere means that
it gets hotter and hotter, okay, so climate sets the space states, okay, and you know we saw the
fact that it looked as though climate was, climate change in the observations even,
and from those experiments was making a big warming blob over here, okay, that would in
theory be increasing the potential temperature of the tropics, and so under global warming we expect
the heights of the tropics, tropical atmosphere to actually rise a bit, and then possibly create
more available potential energy, now whether that happens or not is very complicated because
as soon as available potential energy exists the atmosphere is trying to get rid of it through
kinetic energy, okay, so the atmosphere that states is not a stable state, if you turn off the sun
the atmosphere wants to have equal potential energy everywhere, and so general circulation
of the atmosphere, its whole thermodynamic job, what it's trying to do in terms of thermal energy
is, now I'm going to carry on with the red pen, this picture is getting messy, is to move this
temperature, the hotter air, towards the poles, okay, so there'll be a YouTube video I'll send around,
you'll see that this is what's happening, it wants to move it to the poles, okay, now you're like well
fine, just do the job, you just need to make the air go from there to there, if I want to get air
out of my lungs I can blow it, and where does the air go, it goes in a straight line away from me,
so why does the air not just go in a straight line from the Congo rainforest to the south
pole, let's have a look, okay, any final questions before we carry on, yes,
the gradient,
so it's simply saying at the biggest scale,
for air that is of the same pressure, 500 millibars, this has more potential energy
because it is higher from the resting state, and it's higher from its surface than this air over here,
this air over here,
so another way to think of it,
yes, guess we can raise up this table,
a different way of thinking of it, so if I raise this table up here,
this side of the table has more potential energy than that side, okay, now in the case of the table
it's easy, you drop it down, it's going to reduce that potential energy, okay, but in the case of
the atmosphere that potential energy is because the temperatures have increased it, which means
that the air parcel that's at the equator has more potential energy than the air parcel at the
pole and so it has the potential to fall to create kinetic energy, okay, so there is a
gradient in the geo potential for the same amount of pressure or air mass above these and it wants
to fall to reduce that potential, okay, and so one way it can do is by simply moving in the upper
atmosphere and trying to fall, but the other way the atmosphere can try and do it is the potential
only exists because this is so much warmer than that, and so it says well let's try and get rid
of this heat and move it towards the poles because if we can move the heat we are going to be able to
reach the reference state, the dotted line, when the whole atmosphere has the same geo potential
and we don't need any movement, okay, but the sun keeps burning, every day the sun rises,
it heats up everything and so we keep on building potential energy in the tropical atmosphere
which then this residual part is the available potential energy, okay.
Is everyone following some work here? Okay,
so we're going to come back to the drawing in a moment.
Wait, let me have a think, there might be a different way to do this.
Yes, there is a slightly different way to do this.
Okay, so what did we learn? That there's potential energy
and this potential energy is related to gradients, okay.
Oh, I can just click there. Oh, I found a much easier way to create everything,
that's what called everything. If we look from the top down, okay,
we can look at that geo potential surface again but now we're looking from the top down,
okay, and if we look from the crater to the pole we are looking at the 500 millibar geo
potential surface, okay, but I'm going to draw lines which are the geo potential meters, the height,
okay, so if we start at the pole over here and I draw, oh, I thought I had it,
uh, oh, hang on, oh, it did come,
um, fine.
Oh, the cursor was on that page, not on this page, right, I understand.
Okay, what's the height of that geo potential line at the equator?
At the equator? 14, yeah, okay, so that's 14,000.
Okay, and what was it over here?
Yeah, and so these lines in between
are telling us that that might be
8,000, it's not, it doesn't, it's not smooth but there's a big drop off at a certain point, 10,000,
12,000, okay, that gives you a geo potential gradient, okay, so if you computed,
and so what we normally term geo potential, the symbol we use is,
the mathematicians, what do you call that correctly? I'd say five, but no, is that five?
Five, yeah, okay, right, so now we actually, we actually more often draw it
like straight up and down, okay, that's fine.
The gradient of phi,
okay, in this case, it's not a three-dimensional gradient, we are looking at that,
so this just reduces to quite literally d phi over d, oh no, dy, okay, because we tend to
call north to south in the atmosphere, why? Because if you think about a map,
Africa, South America,
Africa, North, East, we go
y and x, okay, so we just have d phi dy is the geo potential gradient,
yes, so that is the same as looking at the geo potential gradient, like, like this way down, okay.
Bear with me here, because now we're going to talk about pressure.
You can also reframe geo potential, which is now in the middle of the atmosphere,
it's a very useful, 500 millibars is a very useful place to think about the weather,
and I'll show you now why, but we couldn't measure the atmosphere before, we could often
just measure the surface, okay, and at the surface, the only thing we could use is barometers to measure
pressure in millibars or hectopascals, okay, and if you look at the surface then,
you could also actually, it's not going to apply in this context,
but you can have the gradient of pressure, not make it a row, just make it p, okay, and so
you can across the planet have that, you're just looking in the horizontal, which we are, is
the partial of p y plus p x, okay, and this is the pressure gradient, okay. Now,
what's the pressure inside my cheeks now compared to us here?
It's lower here, and in my cheeks, I've made high pressure,
getting physical about the lecture. If we made that a one-dimensional system,
we're just looking at this part, okay, it's not partial anymore, the dp dx,
the dp dx,
and what is happening to the air as it comes out? It's still,
it's expanding, but if we describe its velocity, it's moving quickly.
I mean, we can do it the other way around. The pressure gradient is driving the velocity of the
air at the first instance, okay. We will somewhat interchangeably look at geopotential and pressure,
okay. At the surface of the atmosphere,
when we go back to this previous slide,
okay, wait, first, is this clear before I move on to the next step? Does that make sense what
I've described? Good, okay. At the surface of the atmosphere in this average state,
what have I told you about the pressure?
The mass, is the mass of air over the poles the same as the mass of air of the tropics?
Yes, which means that the pressure at the surface of the tropical atmosphere p
and the pressure at the poles, those are equivalent, so there is a temperature difference
that approximately p at the poles is approximately equal to p
at the tropics or the equator all the time, okay, which means that the surface
there is not a gradient, okay, on average.
But, as you go up in the atmosphere,
because of the temperature difference, you end up with the geopotential gradient, okay.
So, if we think about it in this context, at the surface, is there any pressure gradient
to drive surface winds from the equator to the poles?
At 500 millibars, is there a gradient to drive it? Yes.
But, we are now talking geopotential gradients, not pressure gradients, okay.
So, are you guys logged into your computers? Yeah.
We'll come to it now, okay, when we're looking at the surface or when we're looking in the upper
atmosphere. So, if we're at the surface, we will think about pressure gradient
trying to drive the surface winds from the equator to the poles, okay.
So, if we're at the surface, we will think about pressure gradient
trying to drive wind flow, and if we're in the higher atmosphere, we would talk about
geopotential gradient, yeah, okay. Right, are you guys logged into the computers?
Then you log in and go to our website called windsy.com.
For those of you that are interested, I've had a look and I don't know, it looks like Armagate,
Ames, Ghana might have access, but there's this very lovely book,
Atmospheric and Oceanic Dynamics by Jeffrey Ballas, and it has much of the more formal
mathematical derivations of much of what we're discussing. So, I'm kind of giving you an
informal and loose description of how things work so you get the understanding, but it's a really
good book. If you can get hold of it, I don't know, do you have book grants here to buy
books as well, or is that not part of your scholarships? No, okay. So, we'll see if there's
a way to, I'll see if there's a way to get access so that we can see it, but there's some quite nice
mathematics in there. It's all part of the differential equations, so if you did courses
in that in your undergrad, you should in theory be capable, and if you've done physics, you know,
physics is all about this type of mathematics. I mean, those of you that did physics, would you
agree? Yeah, we are not talking about that though, we are talking about Windy.
Okay, so if we look over here, we are looking at, oh, we're looking at waves, how interesting.
That's not what I was meant to, let's look at pressure.
So, this is an example of a pressure map, it's color shaded. So, red is higher pressure, okay,
blue is lower pressure. So, if we think back to our change in pressure with
x and y, you can see that there is a high pressure here, a low pressure here,
and so there's actually quite a strong gradient between the pressure here and the pressure over
there. So, this you would think would drive wind to move from here to there, but it doesn't.
And that's because of the rotation of Earth, someone asked about that.
And we see how we get on, we might need to leave the,
maybe we can just cover rotation today, but let's see. If you now look on this side,
and we change to just wind, you now have shading of the wind. But what I would like you to do,
so there's a lot of different things here.
What windy is, is this way of visualizing what's happening with the weather models.
You can choose which model. So, ECMWF, European Center for Medium Range Weather Forecasting.
This has its headquarters actually in Reading. So, my postdoc, I left my post, my PhD, finished
in Cape Town, and I went to University of Reading to do a postdoc for three years,
actually studying things called stinget windstorms. They've got a very good meteorology
department, and ECMWF has been in Reading for a very long time. It's a European center. So,
all of you that were good at mathematics, and you lived in Europe, and you liked weather,
you may well have ended up trying to get a job here, because the European countries have agreed,
we want the brightest people here. We want to make sure that they come from, even from the
furthest parts of Europe. So, people are coming from all over the place, far away from Reading.
Reading is a nice town, but it's quite flat. It's England, so the weather is not always great.
To convince people to come, they don't pay tax, and very good salary, but the work they do is
very good. This is probably the best weather forecast in the world. GFS is the global forecast
system. It's the American system. For the longest time, we were using that because ECMWF was only
available to European member states. They now have an open data policy, and so we are using that data
more and more in African applications. The Americans, though, always gave the data away
for free, but that may be changing as Trump finds out, oh, we're giving that data away. No, no, no.
Shut you down. ICON is the German model. We might discuss, yeah, remind me to tell you about ICON.
It's called ICON because it's got an icosahedral grid to solve the equations, and there's one more
Rome REU, so this is the French model, and I'm not sure what the ROME stands for, but that's the
French weather forecast model. What you can see is that wind speeds in this lower atmosphere
are, in knots this case, about 20 knots at maximum. Now, I would like you to
go to ... Where is it hiding?
It's a place that ... Altitude. Here we go. Altitude. So let's go to that 500 millibar one
we've been talking about.
What you can see here, it's on average about 5.5 kilometers high, and actually, when it comes to
airplanes, that's called flight level 180. So airplanes have different flight levels. This is
flight level 180. We can go all the way to the top of the atmosphere.
Airplanes would normally fly maybe around here, so flight level 390, 340, maybe 450, and if we go
back to 500, we're going to have a little bit of a difference. So we're going to have a little bit
340, maybe 450. And if we go back to 500,
immediately, what do you see? At the surface, the wind speeds were 20 knots. Can someone read off
based on that key at the bottom of the page on your screen? How many knots do we see for these winds?
40 to 60. So the winds are much stronger. Why do you think that's happened?
The biggest picture is that now we have a geopotential gradient.
The effect of the fact that warmer air makes higher atmosphere means that at 500 millibars,
that difference was a number we computed. But if you go back up another to 200 millibars or 100
millibars, the geopotential difference is going to be greater because now there's that much
more air that is warmer than the air at the poles. And so let's go up a bit higher.
We're just going to zoom out here.
And so you can see that there is a band across the globe, both in the North and the Southern
Hemisphere, where the winds are incredibly strong, more than 60 knots. And if we ignore
all of the waviness, you just see that there are very strong winds.
Those strong winds are essentially the kinetic energy that is being extracted from the available
potential energy of geopotential being so high here and geopotential being so much lower at
the equator. So the gradient is driving very strong winds. But what's the problem here?
If I blow out my mouth, the pressure is high here and it's lower here and the wind goes...
Is that wind going like that?
No. Any guesses? Does anyone... I mean,
people might have done some of this work before. Any guesses? What's happening here?
Maybe the rotation.
The rotation. Exactly. So
would you guys like to hear a bit about the rotation now?
Or should we save that for tomorrow and we go into some practical work?
We're a democracy in a slush. Who wants to save for tomorrow?
I should be the dictator, but no.
So it turns out that the Navier-Stokes equation is the equation that we can use
to describe the fact that when there's pressure inside my mouth and there's low pressure outside,
it makes strong wind. Okay? The Navier-Stokes equation, those of you that did the fluids
course, in what context was the Navier... What did Richard Katz use the Navier-Stokes equation
to help describe mathematically?
Right. And what particular fluid did he look at?
Biscuit fluids. Okay. What does that mean?
It still means that we neglect the fluid, the viscosity of the fluid.
Okay. So you neglect the viscosity. Okay. And what sort of processes did he show?
Okay. So wind flow, things that maybe look like this. I'll talk a bit about this Millennium Prize
stuff because there's some interesting side notes on that. But you can write up the equations,
solve them numerically in a computer, and you can describe this type of flow. Okay? In this case,
what you have is two different fluids of different colors. There's a density gradient
between them, or some sort of gradient. Yeah, it's a density gradient. Okay? You can actually
see these. These are called Kelvin-Helmholtz instabilities. When you have a cloud deck,
which it's rare that you see it, but you can see this in nature. You have a low cloud deck,
and then above that cloud deck is some very strong winds blowing.
And essentially, you create these water seas and this happens. So is this the type of thing that
you would have seen in Richard Katz's lecture? I mean, I know a lot of it was the mathematics.
Okay. So the Navier-Stokes equation is also what is used to solve for wind flow over aeroplane
wings. Okay. It's a very rich equation that can capture the behavior of fluid flows from the scale
of how the fluid flows across my hand as I wave it in the room to the scale of motion that we
were seeing on windy. Okay. And so I won't go through this. There are some annotated slides
from when I did it last year, but it basically amounts to the fact that there is the pressure
gradient. Okay. And the change in velocity of a fluid parcel or particle, it could be air,
it could be water. So a change in time of that velocity is related to the pressure gradient.
Okay. It's also related to the fluid that's around it. Okay. So if you have a fluid,
this parcel has a certain amount of speed. It has a velocity. Its change in velocity
is related to the pressure gradient. That's this term. Okay. It's also related to the density.
So the pressure gradient acting on a less dense fluid could act more quickly and change the
velocity more quickly than a more dense fluid. So if you apply a pressure gradient across air,
its density is lower and therefore the response will be quicker. But if you apply it in water,
water's density is like a thousand times that of air. And so you apply the pressure gradient,
its response time will be slower. Okay. So that's what that controls for.
This is the advection of the velocity. So the other way that the velocity at a given point can
change is because there is very strong velocity here, but that velocity is being advected across
to this point. So we are stuck in space. There's some very strong velocity here and the advection,
which is this term here, can move it across. Okay. And this is because
B in this case is representing three-dimensional flow. Okay. It's X, Y and Z. For the atmosphere,
we normally approximate it as X and Y. Okay. So we just approximate velocity in the horizontal
plane for a lot of the way we think about it, because the velocities in the vertical plane are
very small. You then move into this. So this term here is normally used to refer to mu. So it's
viscosity, how viscous the flow is. That will change the shear of the flow. Okay. And so we
have a different operator here. It's not the gradient. Laplacian? Okay. So it's the
gradient of the gradient. Okay. So that is often phrased.
Oh, we still got a pen. So that I think is often can also be phrased like that. Yes. Yeah. Okay.
So it's the gradient of the gradient. And then you can have other terms, other frictional terms
and such. You can imagine that if you've got fluid across the table, there's a certain amount
of friction that is going to slow it down. And so I think ultimately when I did this in the pipe
context, if you think about a pipe, I'll do it very briefly, and you have pressure one,
you have pressure two, could be my mouth. You have, this reduces to be just one-dimensional.
So instead of v, we're talking about u. So it's just the x component of velocity. And
we can then have the change of u with time is going to be, there's no evictions to talk of here.
Is equal to one over rho, the change of p with x.
Plus some, we can again talk about flows where we neglect viscosity. We have some frictional effect.
Okay. And that is going to drive
a flow like that. So the velocity du dt, the speed will increase. But then as you go to the walls,
if you have viscosity, if you have friction, the velocity profile will look like this
until you're at the wall. This would be called a no slip condition. So you would say that there is
no slip at the boundary. Okay. And so that velocity profile would end up looking something like
this. Okay. Which is what you see in a river. If you look at a river, the water flows much faster
in the middle.
So, okay. So I've said all of that. Pressure gradient force, friction, flow in a pipe. Okay.
Okay. And this is where geophysical fluid dynamics is. So there's fluid dynamics
and there's geophysical fluid dynamics. What's the big thing that's changed? Okay. We say we
changed how this is formulated. We've taken this into a material derivative so that this has both
the change in time and the eviction components. Okay. Anyone spot the difference here?
This massive term over here. Well, we've lost our pen. Okay. It's about rotation. Earth is rotating.
And that's what important is that this is a momentum equation. It is about how the speed
of the particle changes and is related to the density. So momentum, if you've done physics,
is about speed and mass. Okay. So we can both be running at the same speed, but I'm running next to
a marathoner who is going to finish the marathon in two hours and I'm going to finish it in three
and a half hours. My mass is much greater. And even if we're running at the same speed,
my momentum is greater. Okay. And unless something changed comes to accelerate
or change momentum, momentum remains conserved. Okay. And that's where this rotation part comes in.
Because Earth is spinning, which means that an air parcel that's up at the top here
Oh, my pen is back. Good. An air parcel that is at the top over here at the equator
is spinning. Okay. That means that when we think about that air parcel, it both has the speed that
it might be moving across the pole, but it also has rotation. And in this case, it's the rotation
of Earth. Okay. Which is what this two omega is. Okay. So this is a radial, it's in radians per
second. Okay. So it's how much Earth is rotating. And that means that because that is now angular
momentum, so momentum that I have now is just standard momentum, but the momentum I have now
is angular momentum. Okay. So if I am dancing, I have both a
X component of momentum and I have an angular component of momentum. Okay. And we have to take
that into account if we are going to stay true to the physics of the problem of maintaining
conserving momentum. Everyone happy with assumptions and points that statements I've made so far? Okay.
If you come down to the equator,
and you imagine that you are on the equator, look at this person. I stayed in the same place.
Did that particle have angular momentum or just you who was saying? Who was saying horizontal?
Yeah. Yeah. Only horizontal. All right. What does that tell you? It tells you that the angular
momentum of a particle or fluid on Earth is dependent on its latitude. Okay. So what we
tend to do is we divide Earth into latitudinal belts like this. And those latitudinal belts
are simply, oh, I can't draw straight. If we draw a line from
if we draw a line from an angle from here to here. So that is obviously 90 degrees.
The pole is at a latitude of 90 degrees. But if we go to here, I mean, I haven't drawn that very
well. So yeah, that's where we're going to here. So that might be about 50 degrees latitude. It's
simply referring to this angle over here. That's 30 degrees. We go up to here. That's 45 degrees
latitude or so. Okay. And so what we need is a way to scale this angular momentum with latitude.
And what comes up is what we end up calling the Coriolis effect or the Coriolis force.
It isn't a force. It looks like a force when you see a parcel move, because it is affecting the
U and V or the X and Y path of a parcel. But all it is is about responding to the angular momentum
balance. Yes. What do you mean by parcels? A handful of air. Yeah, let's say like a handful
of air. It could be a single air molecule, but let's just say it's a handful, for want of a
better word. Okay. And so we end up with this equation where sine of that being 90 degrees.
Okay. So we have the pole is going to end up that that is one and we end up with two omega.
So two omega is, so omega is the rotation of Earth. Okay. And so within this equation,
there's a reason it comes out as two. We can do the mathematics, but in order to have this in
the equation, it's two omega. Okay. It's related to the fact that it's angular momentum rather than
angular velocity. So that is the angular velocity of Earth, how fast it spins, but the angular
momentum of Earth is two omega. Okay. So essentially, and so you can see that that's
going to evaluate two omega at this. So what is omega? We'll work it out quickly.
So what is a full rotation
in radians? Two pi.
Two pi. Okay. How long does it take for Earth to do a full rotation?
24 hours. So we have 24 hours times by
60 minutes in each hour times by 60 seconds in each hour.
So, omega is equal to that value. Okay. It's how long it takes Earth to do a rotation.
That's the angular speed. Okay. And so then you can work out f. So let's compute what this is
going to be if this value was 45. Someone quickly get off their scientific calculator.
Or do it in their head.
So what we want to do is compute what's the value of f at 45 degrees?
Zero point. Someone else have a?
It's omega radians per second. Yeah.
Sorry.
Yes. Yes. Yes. Yes. Yes. Thank you. Sorry. Yes. It's how long it takes. So it's radians per second.
Yes. Does someone have a number yet for us?
My friend's in my office. I can't go and get my scientific calculator on it.
Do we have a number?
I'm looking for a number that ends up that f.
I remember correctly is about 10 to the minus four.
Anyone get close to that?
So what is it?
Okay.
Yeah, it's on order that's fine if we have a five there.
If we say it was a 10, it would be 10 times 10 to the minus four. So
it's on order 10 to the minus four, 10 to the minus five. Okay.
Yeah. Good. So this is what I was saying is that if you're up here, you have maximum angular
momentum as a parcel of air. But if you're over here, you have less and by the time you get to
here is zero. Okay. And that angular momentum must be conserved. Yes.
So because it's radians per second, it is defined. That's a very important point.
It's defined. What we do is we treat it on the XY plane. So the vector is always
out of the XY plane. So it's orthogonal to Earth's surface. Okay. So because what we are going to do
is mostly look at the equations in the XY plane, because we are looking at fluid flow across Earth
and Earth is essentially two dimensional. I mean, there's vertical height,
but if you were to take Earth's atmosphere and look at it, it's as thin as the skin on an apple.
Okay. So the atmosphere is actually very thin. The vertical dimension is much smaller than the
horizontal dimension. And so this is, you know, at the equator, we are considering
orthogonal to that surface. What is that rotation? And it is this point zero, but over here we are
saying what is the rotation orthogonal to that surface? Okay. Now there is an element of,
there is a component of this, which is also in the vertical direction, that is not in that
direction. So there is a, the true component is here, right? I guess this is the point,
is that that true component is actually in this direction. Okay. And so it's made up of
two different components. And what we do is we look at
only this component, which then is, no, we forget that one. I've got the angles the wrong way around
here. We neglect the one component to only have the one which is the horizontal component.
So we're only thinking about the way in which air is spinning relative to the Earth's surface,
not how air is spinning within the atmosphere. Okay.
And so that's how it comes formally in the equation. If we go back to
this, yeah.
It doesn't look like, which component should we use? I think we have access.
You have, you find access. Oh, cool, good. I'm not sure which chapter it might be,
chapter two. Oh my gosh, you've got access. Excellent. Very good. So it could be
Equations of Effective Rotation and Satisfaction by chapter two, yeah. Oh, I'm glad I remembered.
Okay. Now, it's not that important to actually see that derivation. I mean, if it's interesting to
you, absolutely do. And another very simple way of thinking about it, which is not going to make
sense from the mathematics, okay, it's not going to make sense in that way. But it's thinking about
that pattern that we saw for windy, okay, is if you think about how big Earth's radius is at this
point, okay, versus Earth's radius at this point, okay, and you think about the air parcel is moving
around Earth, okay, this parcel's momentum is its speed on Earth's surface spinning times this radius,
okay. This parcel might be moving at the same speed. So this is now looking at North Africa.
This is looking in Congo, okay. They're moving at the same speed, but this radius is larger,
okay, which means that the angular momentum of this particle that is stationary at its surface
is larger than that one's, okay. So if you think about the angular momentum of this particle,
okay, so what is going to happen if this particle moves over here?
It becomes faster because of the momentum. Okay.
Geopotential is taking air parcels from the equator where they have a lot of angular momentum,
and it is moving them further south. And so in the simplest sense, it is only half correct.
But in the simplest sense, simply because of angular momentum,
this particle has an angular momentum given by the radius to the axis of rotation
and its speed, okay, u.
This parcel, not in the strong wind, but a parcel that is here that is stationary,
r is u. This u, they're making them equivalents between these two, okay. So the speed at which
they go around Earth, they're staying in the same place. If you move this particle here,
because this radius is much bigger, its angular momentum is much larger, which means this parcel
is going to go faster than this parcel, okay. So in the very simplest effect, rotation,
we have to conserve angular momentum because Earth is rotating, and that means that every time
you move a parcel more for south, it is going to be faster if you move it towards the pole.
Similarly, if you go from the pole, now this is even closer to the axis of rotation,
and so that parcel is going to be slower than the area it encounters here,
and it's going to end up having that type of direction, okay. And so that is why, even though
the geopotential
radiance is large from here to here,
air never follows that. Because Earth is spinning so quickly, air ends up going east to west. Yes.
Where is the direction of it?
For the same reason that the R over here, this is now much smaller. So
come on, come back to me, where are you?
It was, yeah, does that think that the Earth is like this? And so it's about R, R1,
R2, and R is small. I get that the difference in radius can cause this like,
but why are they in opposite directions? Because in this case, it's R3 is small, which means its
angular momentum is the smallest, which means in order to conserve angular momentum, as it encounters,
as it moves across Earth's surface to a larger, so the thing about angular momentum conservation,
is that this value, R times U, has to stay constant. So this is equal, this is staying
constant, okay. And that means that as R is increasing, in this case, U has to decrease
in order for that to stay constant. And so that means that, relatively speaking, to this particle,
as this R of this air parcel is coming from here, is approaching R2, which is this parcel,
its U is going to end up much lower than this U. And therefore this one carries on going ahead,
and this one, relatively speaking. Yeah, yeah, okay.
I'd like to stop there for today. Yeah, final question.
Why does the wind always go eastwards when moving from the equator?
Because of this, because at the equator, R is the greatest, so R, R1 at the equator,
is greater. And therefore, as it moves down, and again, it needs to be constant,
in this case, the R is decreasing. And the way to balance a reduction of the
radius that the air parcel is rotating on, is to increase the speed in order for
the angular momentum of that parcel to stay the same. And so if its speed increases,
the parcel is going to be, relatively speaking, accelerating compared to the parcel that was
already there. But why accelerating to the east? Why not the west? Because Earth rotates,
but it's because of the direction Earth rotates. If you made Earth rotate the other way around,
and so actually they do this as, you know, one of the ways to check if your
model has good physics, and they're doing this with the machine learning models,
is to say, well, the neural net that has learned how to represent this animation,
does it just know that because it knows that air must go east to west, and it's faster over here
than over there? Has it actually learned the physics properly? You know, is that now encoded
in the neural net's knowledge in its latent space? And so then you say, ah, okay, let's make Earth
rotate the other way. If it has worked properly, then the neural nets should be able to simulate
an atmosphere in which the gestures go the other way. Of course, you need to then have a neural
net where you can have the rotation rates as external to what it's learning, but, and that's
not a trivial thing, okay. Good. So we're going to leave it there for today. Tomorrow we are going
to go, oh, sorry, this part was not on the camera. Didn't keep track of moving my camera around.
Here we go, here is this.
I'm not sure what's happening with the talking here,
but tomorrow we're going to look at a scale analysis of the Navier-Stokes equation
in order to see how this Navier-Stokes equation, if we specifically filter it
for the length scales and the speed scales that our observations have told us,
we can end up with a simplified equation set, which is a very good approximation to what we
see in the actual atmosphere, okay. So, I don't know, have any of you done scaling analysis?
I mean, if you've done physics, I'm sure you have, but have you done scaling analysis on
equations before? Yes, okay, I'm seeing heads and nodding, but like, yeah, so hands up, who has done
a scaling analysis before? Okay, so there's some hands. So essentially we will do a scaling
analysis to filter the Navier-Stokes equation to see how within the behavior that that equation
describes is both its ability to describe flow in a pipe, flow over a wing, but in this context,
at these spatial scales, with rotation, Navier-Stokes can actually give us a
incredibly powerful description of what's happening in the atmosphere. And this comes to the point
that the Navier-Stokes equation, the very rich equation, and within the things that it can tell
us about is basically all of this behavior, okay. So, let's leave it there. I keep on having less
slides and trying to put less in the lecture, and then we still don't have enough time for practicals.
So, I sent the email yesterday,
uh, can everyone please stand up? We've had a lot of time sitting.
Good, um, can you all, those of you, sit down if you saw my email yesterday and you managed to get
to the final points. So, you finished what I suggested was homework for yesterday.
Okay, so you got to the end of, I think I asked you to say, where in the world are these
indices being plotted? Okay, good. Okay, so it's about half of you. Okay, so that's fine,
it's good to know that we haven't all got to that part yet. Okay, everyone can sit down.
Next question is, so you had some groups yesterday,
and hands up if basically none of your group members are here anymore.
Oh, okay, that's, it's less than half of you. Okay, so maybe those of you that were in your
groups yesterday, if your group is still here, then that's good. Can you go and sit with your
group, please? And then those of you that do not have your group members, can you either join
others that have a group or form your own groups? Again, maximum is four, but we basically want
groups of three. Okay, so those of you that have your group members, can you please go sit with
them today? Get your notebooks open.
